Theory and History of Literature
Edited by Wlad Godzich and Jochen Schulte-Sasse

Volume   1.   Tzvetan Todorov Introduction to Poetics
Volume   2.   Hans Robert Jauss Toward an Aesthetic of Reception
Volume 3.     Hans Robert Jauss
              Aesthetic Experience and Literary Hermeneutics
Volume 4.     Peter Bürger Theory of the Avant-Garde
Volume   5.   Vladimir Propp
              Theory and History of Folklore
Volume   6.   Edited by Jonathan Arac, Wlad Godzich,
              and Wallace Martin
              The Yale Critics: Deconstruction in America

Volume 7.     Paul de Man Blindness and Insight:
              Essays in the Rhetoric of Contemporary Criticism
              2nd ed., rev.
Volume   8.   Mikhail Bakhtin Problems of Dostoevsky's Poetics
Volume   9.   Erich Auerbach
              Scenes from the Drama of European Literature
Volume 10. Jean-François Lyotard
           The Postmodern Condition: À Report on Knowledge
Volume 11. Edited by John Fekete The Structural Allegory:
           Reconstructive Encounters with the New French Thought
Volume 12. Ross Chambers Story and Situation: Narrative Seduction
           and the Power of Fiction
Volume   13. Tzvetan Todorov Mikhail Bakhtin:
              The Dialogical Principle
Volume 14. Georges Bataille Visions of Excess:
           Selected Writings, 1927-1939
Visions
of Excess
Selected Writings,
1927-1939

Georges Bataille
Edited and with an Introduction by Allan Stoekl

Translated by Allan Stoekl,
with Carl R. Lovitt and Donald M. Leslie, Jr.


Theory and History of Literature, Volume 14




University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis
English translation and Introduction copyright © 1985 by the
University of Minnesota
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of
the publisher.                                              —
Published by the University of Minnesota Press
111 Third Avenue South, Suite 290, Minneapolis, MN 55401-2520
http://www.upress.umn.edu
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
Twelfth printing, 2008.
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Bataille, Georges, 1897—1962.
   Visions of excess.

  (Theory and history of literature; v. 14)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1. Bataille, Georges, 1897-1962—Translations, English.
I. Stoekl, Allan.      II. Title.  IIL. Series.
PQ2603.A695A27         1985        844'.912      84-20973
ISBN 978-0-8166-1280-2
ISBN 978-0-8166-1283-3 (pbk.)

This translation presents selections from
Georges Bataille’s Oeuvres complétes, 2 volumes,
© J.-J. Pauvert, for “Histoire de l’oeil,” and
o Editions Gallimard, 1970, for the rest of the volumes.


The University of Minnesota
is an equal-opportunity
educator and employer.
Contents




Introduction Allan Stoekl                   Ix

                                             I        (1927-1930)

[Dream]              3
The Solar Anus                          5
The Language of Flowers                          10
Materialism                    15
Eye        17
The Big Toe                        20
The ‘‘Lugubrious Game’’                      24
Formless                 31
The ‘‘Old Mole’’ and the Prefix Sur in the Words
Surhomme [Superman] and Surrealist        32
Base Materialism and Gnosticism                            45
The Deviations of Nature                     53
Rotten Sun                    57
 Mouth          59
Sacrificial Mutilation and the Severed                    Ear of Vincent Van Gogh   61
The Jesuve            73
The Pineal Eye                   79
The     Use Value of D.           A. F. de Sade                   91

                                             II     (1932-1935)

The Critique of the Foundations of the Hegelian Dialectic                    105
The Notion of Expenditure                          116
Sacrifices           130
The Psychological Structure of Fascism                                 137
Popular Front in the Street                        161

                                             III        (1936-1939)

The Labyrinth                171
The Sacred Conspiracy                   178
Nietzsche and the Fascists                        182
Propositions               197
Nietzschean Chronicle                  202
The Obelisk            213
The Sorcerer’s Apprentice                         223
The Practice of Joy before Death                            235
The Sacred            240
The College of Sociology                      246
A Commentary on the Texts                            257
Index          267
Acknowledgments




I would like first to thank my collaborators on this project, Carl R. Lovitt, who
contributed his translation of ‘‘The Psychological Structure of Fascism,’’ and
Donald M. Leslie, Jr. , who translated ‘‘The Old Mole.’’ In addition Carl pains-
takingly went over most of the translations, checking them against the originals,
catching omissions and errors, rewriting awkward sentences, and making a large
number of valuable suggestions. Don also read a number of translations and
made useful suggestions. This project could not have been completed without
their assistance.
    [ am also grateful to Lindsay Waters and Wlad Godzich of the University of
Minnesota Press, for their enthusiasm and encouragement at all stages of the
project; to Virginia Hans, for her excellent copyediting; and to my friends
Michele Richman, Denis Hollier, Ralph Flores, and Mark Conroy, for their
interest, advice, and criticism.
    Finally I thank Leah Larsen, without whose acuity, moral support, and love,
I would long ago have quit this lugubrious game.
Introduction
Allan Stoekl




                                         I
Georges Bataille was born in 1897 and died in 1962; thus he was the contempo-
rary of André Breton (1896-1966) and Louis Aragon (1897-1982), among
others. Raised in and around Reims, Bataille experienced a difficult childhood
at the hands of a paralyzed and blind, syphilitic father. (At least, so he tells us
in the closing section of the novel Story of the Eye (I, 76-78)'—in the absence
of a biography of Bataille, the details of his life that we mention here, details
that we should perhaps take with a grain of salt, all come from his own writings.)
Bataille and his mother abandoned his father on November 6, 1915, as the
Germans approached the area of Reims. Bataille’s father, now insane, died
shortly thereafter.
    Bataille had already revolted as much as he could against his father’s rule;
he had quit his high school in 1913 (VIII, 459) and had embraced Catholicism—
his father was not religious and died refusing the priest (I, 59-61). From this
Catholic period (summer 1918) dates Bataille’s first published writing, a pam-
phlet honoring Notre Dame de Reims, the great cathedral nearly destroyed by
German shelling (I, 611-16).2 In this piece, Bataille foresaw a rebirth not only
of the cathedral, but of the Christian spirit that made its elevation possible. In
1920, however, Bataille lost his faith, this time for good.
    Despite his earlier dropping out of school, Bataille eventually became a good
student. He prepared for, and was admitted to, the prestigious Ecole des chartes,
where he was trained as a medievalist librarian. After a year in Spain, where
he first witnessed bulifights and perhaps saw the enucleation of the eye of the
                                x J   INTRODUCTION


matador Granero on May 7, 1922,° Bataille obtained a position at the Biblio-
thèque Nationale in Paris, which he held until 1942 (when he was forced to leave
due to ill health).
   Bataille’s thesis as a medievalist was an edition of L’Ordre de Chevalerie, a
medieval romance having to do with the investiture and teaching of knights (I,
99-102). A little later in the decade (1926-28) Bataille published articles on
numismatics in Aréthuse, a review devoted to art and archeology (I, 108-51).
   At the same time, though, Bataille was living a kind of second life (which,
as we will see, nevertheless had important connections with his official career
as medievalist). In 1924 he had met Michel Leiris, a kindred spirit who soon
became associated with the surrealists (VIII, 170-72). Bataille himself was far
from being a calm and orderly librarian. In 1926 he wrote a book entitled W.
C. (later burned by him, although its first chapter, devoted to his heroine Dirty,
has been preserved as the opening section of Blue of Noon),* which had a cover
decorated with the sketch of an eye peeping out of the neck-hole of a guillotine
and which bore the subtitle The Eternal Return. (The first page also carried the
lines of a music hall song: ‘‘God, how the corpse’s blood is sad in the depth
of sound.’’) According to Leiris, one of the book’s few readers, it contained an
account of Dirty and the narrator having an orgy among fishseller’s stalls; the
later chapters, again according to Leiris, juxtaposed an ‘‘aristocratic luxury”’
with the lowest vulgarity.® It was, in Bataille’s estimation, a book ‘‘violently
opposed to all dignity’’ (VII, 460) and eventually caused Bataille to undergo a
psychoanalytic cure. One of his friends, Dr. Dausse, taken aback by the ‘‘viru-
lence and obsessions’’ of W. C. and ‘‘The Solar Anus’’ (1927), arranged for
Bataille to be treated by Dr. Adrien Borel (who two years later, in 1929, treated
Leiris as well).                                   _
    As can be seen from the dream fragment with which this collection begins
(recorded as part of his cure), Bataille’s obsessions were in many ways directly
related to Oedipal terrors, perhaps even more Oedipal in that his father was
blind. Bataille felt that by August 1927 the cure had done away with ‘‘sinister’’
and apparently violent episodes that threatened him (and perhaps others)—but
fortunately it had not done away with the ‘‘intellectual violence’’ (VII, 460) that
he would continue to explore for the rest of his life. In fact these obsessions in
many ways are the animating force behind Bataille’s heterodox ‘‘theory,’’ which
he began to elaborate after 1927. (We do not intend to imply, however, that
Bataille’s obsessions as theory are simply reducible to a putative ‘‘origin’’ in
neurosis or psychosis, and thus can be simply dismissed. Indeed Bataille’s
theory itself would tend to make problematic any such naive causal model.)
    André Breton, the leader of the surrealists, had an aversion to Bataille. Leiris
had told him about W. C., and, on the basis of what he had heard, Breton dis-
missed Bataille as an ‘‘obsessive’’ (VIII, 173). Bataille had translated some
medieval nonsense poems for La Révolution surréaliste in 1926, but Breton was
not at all interested in extending the collaboration.
                                    INTRODUCTION     O xi

   Breton at this time was the leading avant-garde intellectual power broker in
France, and probably the world. Bataille was a virtually unknown librarian. It
certainly would have made sense for Bataille, wanting to express his ‘‘intellec-
tual violence,’’     to associate   himself with   Breton   and    the surrealists.   But   the
hostility was mutual. Bataille was not interested in renouncing his assault on
dignity and beauty, and Breton’s concept of the ‘‘mental doors opening wide’’
involved, in Bataille’s estimation, precisely an affirmation of an aestheticism
and idealism tinged with religion. Bataille by 1927 (in ‘‘“The Solar Anus’’) was
already developing an approach to what he would call later (in, among other
essays, ‘‘The Psychological Structure of Fascism’’) heterogeneous matter—
matter so repulsive that it resisted not only the idealism of Christians, Hegelians,
and surrealists, but even the conceptual edifice-building of traditional material-
ists. It was indeed an all-out assault on dignity.
     Bataille was involved in the founding, in 1929, of a rather luxurious review
devoted to art, entitled Documents. Collaborating with a group of rebel surreal-
ists (Desnos,      Leiris,   Limbour),   and with a group of more conservative              art
historians, Bataille contributed a number of articles in which, for the first time,
he developed his theory. Documents ostensibly presented articles that
commented on lavish illustrations of primitive and avant-garde artworks, as well
as icons of popular culture (for example, a portrait of the flapper Joan Crawford,
her eyes bulging, accompanies Bataille’s definition of the ‘Eye’).® But Bataille’s
essays often violated the general orientation of the review—to the consternation
of some of Documents’ more conservative contributors—commenting as they
did on giant photographs of magnified big toes (‘‘The Big Toe’’) or exposed
plant genitalia (‘‘The Language of Flowers’’). The latter essay, which ends with
a portrait of Sade throwing rose petals into a ditch filled with manure, gave
Breton the opportunity he was waiting for to attack Bataille, and, through
Bataille, the rebel surrealists who       had abandoned     and betrayed him.
    At the close of the Second Surrealist Manifesto (p. 184), citing Marx as his
authority’, Breton in effect condemns Bataille as an *‘excremental philosopher.’’
Breton specifically dismisses Bataille because he sees a profound contradiction
between Bataille’s embrace of the heterogeneous—animality, flies, excre-
ment—and     his tendency,      in spite of all this, to reason.

   M. Bataille’s misfortune is to reason: admittedly, he reasons like
   someone who ‘‘has a fly on his nose’’, which allies him more closely
   with the dead than with the living, but he does reason. He is trying,
   with the help of the tiny mechanism in him which is not completely
   out of order, to share his obsessions: this very fact proves that he can-
   not claim, no matter what he may say, to be opposed to any system,
   like an unthinking brute.

   Breton concludes that this disorder—attempting to reason about what is sim-
ply unreasonable—is nothing more than pathological: ‘“ À state of conscious de-
                                 xii U   INTRODUCTION


ficiency, in a form tending to become generalized, the doctors would say’’ (p.
184). Breton, the former medical technician, even has a term for Bataille’s con-
dition: ‘“psychasthenia’’ (p. 185). In response to the ‘‘Language of Flowers,”’
Breton points out that a rose, even if stripped of all its petals, is still a rose (p.
186); the most telling remark of Breton 1s that, in stripping the rose of its petals
and throwing them in the manure, Sade only wanted to get rid of the usual trap-
pings of poetic sentiment associated with the rose ‘‘in order to try to make the
human mind get rid of its chains’’ (p. 186).
    Thus in Breton we see a certain configuration of values that he opposes to
Bataille:   the refusal of the interpenetration of reason and bestial unreason;    the
desire to psychoanalyze (hence to categorize and cure Bataille); the ideal image
(the rose), and therefore the mind.
    That Breton had an aversion to filth is fairly apparent;® he was taken aback
by Dali’s inclusion of a shit-smear on the underwear of a little man in the lower
right-hand corner of his painting The Lugubrious Game. This brown smudge
found its champion in Bataille. In a footnote to his essay ‘‘The ‘Lugubrious
Game,’ ’’ a clear response to Breton’s charges against him, Bataille in fact sees
the smudge as a kind of vehicle for liberation: through this stain ‘‘a new and
real virility is rediscovered by this person [the man in his underwear] in igno-
miny and horror themselves.”’
    The essay ‘‘The ‘Lugubrious Game’ ’ must be seen in the context of two
                                              ,




fragments, unpublished in Bataille’s lifetime, that are, for their scope and theo-
retical audacity, among his most important writings.? These are ‘‘The Jesuve’’
and ‘‘The Pineal Eye.”’ Both circle around an ‘‘excremental fantasy,”’ a legacy
of an anal fixation worked out in Bataille’s psychoanalytic cure. This fantasy
involves, through the process of evolution, the movement of a tremendous erotic
force up from the ape’s provocative anus to the erect human’s head and brain.
The next stage of evolution, manifested by a kind of parodic Nietzschean super-
man, posits a ‘‘pineal eye,’’ a final but deadly erection, which blasts through
the top of the human skull and ‘‘sees’’ the overwhelming sun. The point here
is not to sublate the anal obsession, but to embrace it; the dialectical procedure
of the psychoanalytic cure when completed suddenly falls, and with it the dialec-
tical movement of human evolution as well. And behind Darwin lurks Hegel:
the temporal movement toward erect, properly adjusted, rational man is one
with the dialectical movement toward Absolute Spirit. But what happens when
this movement is not simply denied—as Breton would have Bataille deny, as
contradictory, his own ability to reason—but pushed as far as it can go? The
answer is that at the end of reason, at the end of man, at the end of the Cartesian
pineal gland (the supposed seat of consciousness) there is only orgasm and a
simultaneous fall, a simultaneous death. Death and perversion do not take place
in splendid isolation; instead, they are at the endpoint of the human. The energy
of obscene, anal sexuality may be temporarily brought to a higher level in the
elevated mind, in the ramrod-straight military man, in spirit—but when spirit
                               INTRODUCTION      C   xiii


reaches its full elevation, it sees the light of night, it becomes the ejaculation that
idealist religious and philosophical systems—Breton’s as well as Hegel’s—had
merely temporarily forgotten and not done away with. At the furthest point of
evolution, of absolute knowledge, elevation is the fall; humanity is animality;
insight is blindness; health 1s terminal pathology; God, when he knows, 1s a pig.
    Castration is thus not forgotten, sublimated, or sublated, but is ecstatically
experienced, as the ax-blade cutting into the ape’s anus, as the father’s actual
castration of the son as a response to the son’s total defiance.
    But this is more than a simple individual experience of night. Bataille makes
it clear in ‘‘The Pineal Eye’’ that his considerations have to do not only with
evolution but with larger sociological phenomena. The pineal eye is experienced
communally; the gibbon is sacrificed, the eye/anus/brain in its ejaculation/defe-
cation/thought becomes an erotic and sacrificial object not just for an isolated
individual, but for a cult, a secret society, or perhaps even, by implication, for
an entire civilization at the end of history. Hence Bataille’s opening remarks on
anthropology: what is needed is not simply an anthropology that will reduce
myth and collective experience to the status of ideal mental (and academic) cate-
gories, but instead an anthropology that will itself provide a living—and orgias-
tic—myth to overturn, through its experience on a collective level, ‘“modern’’
sterile bourgeois society.
    It must be remembered, however, that evolution (and thus the dialectic) is not
simply escaped or done away with. It is impossibly fulfilled, and completed, at
the recurrent instant in which it is ruptured and annihilated. Bataille’s text itself
stands in an impossible neutral space between absolute knowledge and its im-
placably hostile double, sheer loss. Yet the text is neither one nor the other; it
is precisely the conjoining of the two that establishes their identity as automutila-
tion, their violent doubling. In fact one of Bataille’s other essays from this period
of Documents is an affirmation of the madman’s duality and automutilation:
‘“Sacrificial Mutilation and the Severed Ear of Vincent Van Gogh.”
    One could argue that the pattern established in ‘“The Jesuve’’ and ‘“The
Pineal Eye’’ reappears, in its various guises, throughout the later work of
Bataille. But one would have to be careful: Bataille is not simply privileging a
new object (excrement, flies, ruptured eyes, the rotten sun, etc.) over the old
one (the head, the king, spirit, mind, vision, the sun of reason, etc.). If, as
Angus Fletcher has pointed out in Allegory,'° the medieval allegorical imagina-
tion posits a fundamental congruence between hierarchy in the body and the
guaranteed, stable meaning of allegory (in the body, the highest element is the
head; in society, the king; and in the universe, God), then we must conclude that
a theory that simply substituted one hierarchy for another (a hierarchy that
favors the high replaced by one that favors the low) would only inaugurate a new
metaphysics and a new stabilized allegorical system of meaning. Filth would
replace God.
    But Bataille’s approach is not that simple. Fully conversant as a medievalist
                                    xiv J   INTRODUCTION


with the theoretical implications of allegory, Bataille precisely recognizes that
the fall of the elevated and noble threatens the coherent theory of allegory itself.
This is not to imply that allegory 1s simply done away with in Bataille—any more
than is the dialectic—but rather, that what Bataille works out 1s a kind of head-
less allegory, in which the process of signification and reference associated with
allegory continues, but leads to the terminal subversion of the pseudostable
references that had made allegory and its hierarchies seem possible. The fall of
one system is not stabilized, is not replaced with the elevation of another; the
fall in Bataille’s allegory is a kind of incessant or repetitious process. Thus filth
does not ‘‘replace’’ God; there is no new system of values, no new hierarchy.
In the Documents        articles, Bataille’s attention wanders through a disseminated
field, a labyrinth, of possibilities; flowers, excrement, toes, Gnosticism, freaks,
mouth, sun, severed fingers. Even if it may seem that one term is momentarily
privileged (sun/anus), that term itself only signifies the failure of all the other
terms to stand clearly in relation to a ‘“higher’’ signified."" Indeed one could
argue that for this reason, Bataille’s ‘‘terminology’’ itself (and his ‘‘theory’’ as
well) is fundamentally unstable, not only in these early writings, but in every-
thing he wrote. The very term heterogeneous, positively valued in the early
writings,    later (in the   1940’s)   comes   to indicate   what   seems   to be the exact
opposite.'? The same change takes place in the word sovereignty, indeed even
in the figure of Nietzsche, who 1s taken to task (for being a reactionary) in ““The
‘Old Mole’ and the Prefix Sur in the Words Surhomme (Superman] and Surreal-
ist,’’ but who is, in the later 1930’s, seen as a major precursor and, free of all
political   taint,   the victim   of Fascist   misrepresentation.    Among    other   things,
then, Bataille’s project must be seen as a kind of allegory of the fall of allegory
itself. This fall of allegory is in fact consonant with the fall of the copula in
Bataille, and with the ramifications of that fall. (We might speak of the allegory
of the fall of the copula.) As we learn in ‘‘The Solar Anus,”’
   But the copula of terms is no less irritating than the copulation of
   bodies. And when I scream I AM THE SUN an integral erection
   results, because the verb ro be is the vehicle of amorous frenzy.

      Everyone is aware that life is parodic and that it lacks an
   interpretation.
      Thus lead is the parody of gold.
      Air is the parody of water.

   The copula/copulation dyad is unstable; it is both a function of language and
of bodies; because God is dead, a definitive interpretation guaranteed by a stable
copula—and mandating its parody, productive copulation—is sacrificed. The
unstable copula leads to obscene, parodic, burlesque, and ever-inverted significa-
tions; unstable copulation leads to perverse and morbid sexuality. And because
                                INTRODUCTION      U   xv


of the parodic status of each side of the copula/copulation dyad (in relation to
the other), we cannot say that one ‘‘causes’’ the other (that is, we cannot say
that the destabilization of signification generates or subsumes the destabilization
of sexuality, or vice versa): along with stable signification, a straightforward
(““scientific’’) model of causation   is parodied,    for example,   when   ‘‘The Solar
Anus’’ presents the copulation of lovers ‘‘causing’’ the earth to turn, their move-
ment a burlesque of the horizontal motion of the locomotive’s piston’s ‘‘caus-
ing’’ the rotation of its wheels.
    This is not to say, then, that Bataille wafts off into a purely linguistic or gram-
matological conundrum. On the contrary, starting with ‘“The ‘Old Mole’                ”
(which probably dates from 1929 or 1930), Bataille sees his critique of the ele-
vated—the ideal, the surreal—as inseparable from a political critique of fascism.
““The ‘Old Mole’ >’ (written for the avant-garde review Bifur and unpublished
in Bataille’s lifetime) is an attempt to see irreducibly ‘‘base’’ matter in the con-
text of Marxist revolution. Base materialism, unlike pragmatic or functionalist
theories of materialism, does not pass beyond matter in the construction of a
‘“scientific’’ conceptual edifice. (A materialism that generates abstract ‘‘laws’’
is in complicity with idealism: see the Documents article ‘‘Materialism.’’) In-
stead, base materialism posits a matter that cannot be reduced to systems of
scientific or political mastery. Marx’s ‘‘old mole’’ burrows under and subverts
the idealism that founds and legitimates systems as diverse as authoritarian im-
perialism (fascism), utopian socialism, the Nietzschean superman, and *‘spir-
itual’’ surrealism. The imperial eagle that signifies these entities flies over (sur),
but its easy mastery will be definitively disrupted when the repugnant revolu-
tionaries tear it out of the sky. In Bataille’s view, the bourgeois individuals—like
Nietzsche or Breton—who foster a desire to revolt by soaring ‘‘above’’ are des-
tined for a fall, and in a way want to fall: thus the ‘‘Icarian complex,’’ an ‘‘un-
conscious’’ and pathological desire to fall. Icarian revolt (as opposed to base
subversion) is the only pathology Bataille will condemn; it is the pathological
refusal to embrace stinking decomposition—an embrace that, from the point of
view of any dialectic of the cure, must itself be pathological.


                                           Il
But what of the Marxist dialectic in all this? Although Hegel is condemned in
‘“The ‘Old Mole,’ ’’ a dialectical movement was clearly already implicit in the
‘“Pineal Eye’’ writings. How can definitively disruptive low matter be joined to
a progressive Marxist dialectic (without which there is only utopian idealism),
at the same time avoiding a fall into an ‘‘abstract and mechanical’’ Hegelian
movement?
   This is a major problem. The dialectic, as we know from Alexandre Kojeve’s
reading of Hegel, sets as its major task the recuperation of negativity.'* Thus
                              xvi L] INTRODUCTION

the importance of the master-slave dialectic for the Marxist Kojève: the slave
gains essential mastery over the master through his constructive use of the dead
matter the master would fly above. Bataille, who followed Kojève’s lectures
throughout the 1930s, soon accepted the inescapability of Hegel and Marxist-
Hegelian knowledge (for Kojeve’s Hegel was thoroughly Marxist). But—and
this is the problem—if negativity is always reappropriated in the progressive
dialectic, how   radically perverse and ‘‘base’’ will it be? Does not Bataille’s
‘“base matter’’ itself prove eminently useful, leading outside of itself to finally
stable constructs (such as the ‘‘end of history’”), in which negativity will have
no place and in which it will definitively evaporate?
    From late 1931 to early 1934 Bataille was involved in an anti-Stalinist
Marxist review, La Critique Sociale, edited by Boris Souvarine. In the articles
he wrote for this review, Bataille attempted to join more systematically his
theory of baseness—and now, expenditure—to the class struggle and the Marxist
dialectic.
    The first effort was an article written with Raymond Queneau, ‘‘The Critique
of the Foundations of the Hegelian Dialectic’’ (1932). The goal here is to free
dialectical negation from the mechanical abstraction given it (so the article
argues) by Engels.
    In the crucial ‘‘Notion of Expenditure’’ (1933) Bataille lays his cards on the
table. We see here the kind of nonabstract negativity that Bataille would find in
the dialectic, animating the class struggle and leading to the final Revolution.
This negativity does not have to do with the constructive labor of the slave, but
instead finds its ‘‘origins’’ in the destructive orgiastic drive—in potlatch—that
is, according to Bataille, man’s most fundamental ‘“need.’’ Drawing on the
anthropological writings of Marcel Mauss, Bataille sees the need to expend not
only as one that characterizes society, but as one that enables the rich, who can
destroy more than anyone else, to establish themselves above the poor, whom
they have also destroyed. Although Bataille’s approach here bears a superficial
resemblence to that of Thorstein Veblen, Bataille goes in exactly the opposite
direction. ‘“Conspicuous consumption’’ for Bataille is not a pernicious remnant
of feudalism that must be replaced by total utility; instead, it is the perversion
of man’s ‘‘need to destroy.’’ The noble, and even more hypocritically, the bour-
geois, use this ‘‘destruction’’ not to destroy completely, but simply to reaffirm
their position in the hierarchy.
    Revolution, then, is a liberation of the true nature of expenditure, heretofore
only glimpsed in social phenomena such as gambling, ritual destruction, the
Christian glorification of Christ’s death, and perverse sexuality, and then mis-
construed. Through Revolution, for the first time, the ‘ ‘lower’’ classes take con-
trol of the means of expenditure. And what they expend is precisely the ruling
class, in a bloody and orgiastic social potlatch. In this parody of Nietzsche, it
is not the rulers who exude force, but those ‘‘situated below’’ who do.
                              INTRODUCTION     U   xvii


   The Marxist dialectic here becomes a parodic dialectic, one of the history of
modes of expenditure, of ‘‘nonlogical difference’’; at the end of history, the
proletariat controls not only the means of production—negativity put to work—
but the means of destruction as well. Potlatch can no longer be used for reaction-
ary ends: now all human beings are free to lose themselves in it. Production in
Bataille’s view is clearly subordinate and posterior to destruction: people create
in order to expend, and if they retain things they have produced, it is only to
allow themselves to continue living, and thus destroying.
   Bataille continues this line of argument in his ‘‘Psychological Structure of
Fascism’’ (1933). Here again conservation is seen as a kind of aftereffect of
loss—or, in the terms of this article, homogeneity is an aftereffect of hetero-
geneity. The article sees two forms of heterogeneity in opposition to the simple
closed circle of homogeneous consumption and production. One, akin to the
‘“Icarian revolt’’ in ‘’The ‘Old Mole,’ ’’ is imperative, associable with that
which is noble, pure, superior, individual, and so on. This is the master, re-
moved from the daily processes of life. The other is impure, involving untouch-
able things and people. The imperative, or sovereign, form of heterogeneity
goes to aid the homogeneous forces: it guarantees the stability of a society,
which can give itself meaning only through the sadistic exclusion of impure
heterogeneity. The king or the fascist leader (as imperative heterogeneity) is in
a way excluded from the homogeneous activities of society, but he dominates
that society and embodies it. The poor, the workers, the ignoble untouchables
are also separated from homogeneous society, but they are doomed by it to
destruction.
    We might briefly indicate at this point one problem with the line of argument
in this fascinating and rich article. Bataille elsewhere (in ‘‘The Notion of Expen-
diture’’) indicates with what ease impure heterogeneity, in the form of the bleed-
ing body of Christ, comes to be imperative heterogeneity: Christ after he has
died ascends to heaven and guarantees a finally regressive social structure.
Could we not argue that the distinction between the two types of heterogeneity
is quite fragile, and that as soon as a given form of impure heterogeneity comes
to be seen as a positive value, it will itself inevitably become imperative? In the
very act of writing about various forms of trash, in valuing them by devoting
articles to them, does not Bataille simply erect them as new privileged values,
as privileged as the trashy lumpen proletariat and thugs who have become fascist
rulers? And if so, as imperative heterogeneity, are they really so different from
fascism and its fetishes? This problem is even more acute in that Bataille notes,
at the end of ‘‘The Psychological Structure of Fascism,’’ the success fascism has
had in stimulating the ‘‘renewed affective forces’’ of powerful crowds. But how
easy will it be to separate reactionary ideology and the charisma of the leader
from the orgiastic agitation of the mob,   if one, as a Marxist,   wants to use and
promote this agitation?
                               xviii [J INTRODUCTION

    Clearly the threat of the reestablishment of a new hierarchy is not as easily
escaped as we might have thought when we discussed ‘‘The Pineal Eye’’ and
the articles from Documents. It might seem that once God is dead the risk of
fascism is inescapable, because there is nothing to guarantee that a privileged
impure heterogeneity will not become imperative.
    In fact Bataille faced this problem on a practical as well as a theoretical plane.
Bataille founded a political group of intellectuals called Contre-Attaque with (of
all people) André Breton in late 1935. 1935-36 was the greatest period of polit-
ical effervescence in France since the Paris Commune        of 1871; it culminated in
May-June 1936 with massive strikes in all sectors of the economy and the
assumption of power by the Popular Front, an alliance of Socialists and Com-
munists headed by the Socialist Léon Blum.
    The reader will note in the speech (‘‘Popular Front in the Street’’) given by
Bataille at a Contre-Attaque meeting in November 1935 the emphasis placed on
force, agitation, and violence, to the exclusion of boring political and doctrinal
debates. By the time this speech was published in May 1936, Breton’s surrealist
contingent was already disclaiming any association with Contre-Attaque, label-
ing it ‘‘sur-fasciste’’ (I, 640-41). Bataille himself in later years did not deny that
in this group, among Bataille’s friends and even in himself, there was a certain
‘‘paradoxical fascist tendency’’ (VII, 461).
    Effervescence, the subversive violence of the masses, the baseness of their
refusal to enter into boring discussions—all     these things, then, without a clear
and correct (even if boring) theory behind them, could easily be reversed into
fascism, as Bataille quickly became aware.
    Another difficulty in Bataille’s arguments, implicit all along, also comes to
the fore at this point. To what extent has the dialectic not been subverted in any
way by Bataille, to what extent, in paying lip service to the limitlessness of this
destructive tendency that constitutes man, does Bataille simply establish a new
‘““need’’ that must in turn be recognized (at the end of history) and satisfied in
order to guarantee the stability of society? Boring, useful labor—which certainly
constitutes stable society—would in this case only be replaced by the safety valve
of sacrificial violence or the scapegoat. These forms of institutionalized violence
would be useful in that they would guarantee the ultimate permanence of society
and of a given social order. This view is frequently found; we see it, in various
guises, in Emile Durkheim, in Roger Caillois, and, in the postwar period, in
René Girard.'* Bataille seems to take this position already in ‘‘The Notion of
Expenditure,”” when he writes of the ‘‘need for limitless loss’’—even though he
indicates that, in trying to satisfy this ‘‘need,’’ people necessarily run the risk
of risking themselves   totally, like the gambler    who   cannot stop, or the chief,
engaged in potlatch, who frenziedly destroys everything, including himself.
   But can any one ‘‘need’’ be different in kind from another, even though one
is a need for construction and satisfaction, and the other is a need for destruction
                              INTRODUCTION     O   xix


and loss? And if they are not fundamentally different, how radical is this ‘‘need
to expend’’? How different is it from, say, a need for leisure time, or exercise?
If man ‘‘produces only in order to expend,’’ is expenditure different in kind
from any other human value, such as religion or the family?


                                        IIT
Bataille’s activities after the collapse of Contre-Attaque and up to the start of
World War II were divided between two closely linked projects that were never-
theless independent: Acéphale and the Collège de Sociologie. We will discuss
Acéphale first.
    The public face of Acéphale was the review of the same name, which
appeared as a small-format brochure only four times between June 1936 and
June 1939. Among the contributors—and members of the Acéphale group—
were Bataille (who clearly set the topic for each issue and did a large portion
of the writing), Georges Ambrosino,     Pierre Klossowski, Jean Wahl,      and Jules
Monnerot. Bataille was fortunate in having as illustrator André Masson, whose
sketches portraying the acephalic man in flight and on the ground set the proper
cosmological-orgiastic tone. (Bataille had earlier written ‘‘Sacrifices’’ as a
preface to a collection of Masson’s drawings.)
     While the review was public (indeed, a proposal for an advertisement ran:
‘“If you are not crushed you must subscribe to Acéphale’’), the Acéphale group
itself was considered to be a ‘‘secret society,’’ its rituals closed to the public.
Clearly Bataille had fundamentally changed his conception of the nature of the
political activity to be carried out. Nietzsche now is invoked rather than Marx:
Acéphale number 2 contains (among other things) responses to right-wing polit-
ical readings of Nietzsche, showing how the Nazis were misquoting him and
misrepresenting his positions (*‘Nietzsche and the Fascists’”). The secret society
is a group of adepts, operating in the margins of (and acting against) official
society. Bataille for a long time had been interested in marginal groups: Gnos-
tics, madmen, knights, sects of heterodox Christian mystics. The Acéphale
group was also outside the mainstream of political life: subversive yet not in-
tended to lead an organized mass movement,         the activities of the group would
help stimulate a rebirth of the kind of social values Bataille had espoused in the
Critique Sociale essays: expenditure, risk, loss, sexuality, death. The Acéphale
group offered nothing in the way of the standard economic and material prom-
ises—that was left to the mainstream groups, though Acéphale was certainly not
against progressive reforms in the social and economic spheres. But its main
goals were the rebirth of myth and the touching off in society of an explosion
of the primitive communal drives leading to sacrifice. Myth, as Bataille states
in ‘‘The Sorcerer’s Apprentice,’’ is the way open to man after the failure of art,
science (and scientific notions of causation), and politics to reach these lower—
                                 xx L] INTRODUCTION

and more   ‘‘essential’’—human drives, and after their failure as well to lead to
a paradoxically    rent but   ‘‘true’’   existence.   Of the    mythic   figures   Bataille
proposes (Dionysos, the Crucified, Nietzsche himself), the acephalic man is the
most important. As a secret sect, the Acéphale group participated in rites such
as a meeting in a ‘‘sacred’’ place near a tree struck by lightning—a point of inter-
section between lower, chthonian forces and falling higher forces (see the “‘In-
structions for the Meeting    in the Forest,’’   II, 277-78).   There was even talk of
an actual human sacrifice being performed, but it was never carried out.'®
    Clearly much of this orientation is familiar; the low, chthonian forces are
related to the big toe, the ape’s anus, and the ‘‘old mole’’; the acephalic man
is a not so distant cousin of the duck-headed archontes of ‘‘Base Materialism
and Gnosticism.’’ But we also see a response to the risk of fascism encountered
in the Contre-Attaque positions. The secret group will never come to power nor
will it be involved with an official party: in its marginality it 1s closer to the situ-
ationists or the autonomes of the 1960s or 1970s than it is to any traditional
organized party or mass movement. And the Acéphale is precisely without a
head—whereas many Fascists of the period, such as Drieu la Rochelle (as in his
pamphlet Avec Doriot),'® were calling for a return to communal values, the in-
tegrated life, etc., but with a head, in this case named Doriot, but in others La
Rocque, Mussolini, Hitler—or Stalin.
    Despite the fact that Bataille at this time was calling himself ‘‘ferociously
religious,’’ it must be understood that this was a religion celebrating a total lack
of religion. The acephalic man through Nietzsche represented the death of God
as well as the death of the classical conception of man: ‘“Man will escape from
his head as the condemned man escapes from his prison.’’ The ‘“deleterious’’
time of the eternal return is embraced (as in ‘‘The Obelisk’’ [1938]) and, at its
most extreme, the experience of the death of God becomes an unspeakable and
unwriteable—yet written—account of the individual’s contact, through medita-
tion, with joy, dread, war, and death (‘‘The Practice of Joy before Death’’
[1939]). This radical negativity finally does not have any usefulness to society
(such as acting as a safety valve to let off harmful pressure), but is instead identi-
fiable with mystical experiences that involve a disbelief in the very existence of
God.
    The Collège de Sociologie was as public as the Acéphale group was private.
Its activities centered around biweekly lectures given either by the founding
members—Bataille, Roger Caillois, Michel Leiris—or by invited speakers, such
as Alexandre Kojève, Anatole Lewitzky, Pierre Klossowski, and others.'” The
effort here was to redefine a ‘‘science of the sacred,’’ replacing a narrow func-
tionalist sociology with one that would recognize the importance of the various
forms of ‘‘expenditure’’ not only for ‘‘primitive’’ societies, but for modern
societies as well. Thus the College was meant to study the tendencies of man
that the Acéphale group hoped somehow to spark. Both Caillois and Leiris were
                                        INTRODUCTION   U     xxi


trained in sociology and anthropology, thus assuring a level of rigor (purposely)
excluded from the activities of Acéphale.
     The Collège in the years 1937-39 was quite influential, serving as a meeting
ground for avant-garde (para- or neo-surrealist) intellectuals and social scien-
tists, each group profiting from the presence of the other. Claude Lévi-Strauss,
Jean-Paul      Sartre,   and   Walter    Benjamin   all attended         at'one     time   or another;
Benjamin was scheduled to give a lecture in the 1939-40 series,'® but the war
broke out in September, putting an end to the Collège and with it an epoch of
French literary, artistic, and philosophical activity.
    In order to examine the social manifestations of the sacred, it was first neces-
sary to present the way in which communities are ‘‘composed’’; this in part is
Bataille’s object in ‘“The Labyrinth’’ (1936). For Bataille all entities are collec-
tions of other entities; there is no simply isolable ipse that would represent
unitary being. What cells are to a human being, a human being is to that larger
organism, the community. Being is not simple identity, but rather rupture or dis-
equilibrium, the sudden change of levels: being is violent difference, precarious-
ness and heterogeneity in relation to a given stable group (*‘the virulent madness
of its autonomy in the total night of the world’’ [‘‘The Labyrinth’’]). Being is
not totality, but the loss of an element that is impossibly (but necessarily)
independent. We can imagine this phenomenon occurring on different levels;
on the level of a human body, it might be the momentary autonomy and hetero-
geneity of the spurt of blood of the sacrificial victim; on the level of a commu-
nity, it might be the infinite improbability of a me in revolt or death (see also,
on this problem,         ‘‘Sacrifices’’), or the momentary           autonomy       of the conjoined
being of two lovers; on the scale of the community as well, it might be the revolt
of marginal or impoverished groups; on the level of nations, it might be the
struggle for independence of a remote and miserable region that dares to fight
the capital,     where    wealth,   permanence,     power,         and   divinity   are centered.    In
each case we see a rupture opening to let out the ‘‘excess’’ of an unmaintainable
and thus delusive unity, whether that unity is consciousness,                       the body, a com-
munity, or even a nation. ‘‘The Obelisk’’ presents a similar model; there it is
a fall from a timeless pyramidal elevation of godhood, kingship, and power, a
fall that is nevertheless inherent in the constitution of that elevation.
    Finally, Bataille’s text itself, in its language, may represent the rupture of
unity through a rewriting of ‘‘major’’ philosophies—especially those of
Heidegger (‘‘being’’) and Kierkegaard (‘‘dread’’)—by a resolutely marginal,
fragmentary, and impossible project.*?
    To be sure, there were conflicts in the College; the lecture we present here
on it, the last given by Bataille at the Collège, shows clearly enough the kinds
of objections raised by Leiris and Caillois,?® who felt Bataille was straying too
far in his speculations from the orthodoxy (and ‘critical distance’’) of Durkheim
and Mauss, and was lingering too much over ‘‘morose preconceptions.’’ It
                                xxn   [] INTRODUCTION


seems unlikely that, had Leiris and Caillois been present at the meeting of July
4, 1939, they would have been satisfied by Bataille’s remarks. In any case, he
continued his research in what for him were the most basic questions of anthro-
pology and sociology, and this work led in the postwar period to the extremely
important La Part Maudite (1949; The Cursed Share, untranslated) (VII,
 17-179), as well as to L’Erotisme (1957, translated as Death and Sensuality).*!
    If the theoretical orientation of Acéphale moved toward a radical *‘individ-
ual’’ experience of non-sense, it would seem that the College was oriented in
the opposite direction, toward a consideration of the human being and human
expenditure as a function of collective (or social) needs or desires. Here we run
up against the problem that we broached at the end of the last section: how
radical s this expenditure if it merely fulfills another need of society and through
this fulfillment guarantees society’s perpetual subsistence? Bataille states this
problem at the end of the ‘‘College of Sociology’’ lecture of July 4, 1939:
‘¢       . 1t is difficult to know to what extent the community is but the favorable
occasion for a festival and a sacrifice, or to what extent the festival and the
sacrifice bear witness to the love given to the community.”’
    Bataille here confronts as a kind of ‘‘impasse’’ the ‘‘last question of man.’’
Is the community a means to the end of free expenditure, or is this expenditure
a means to the end of a stable community? It would seem that any theory con-
cerned with the various forms that a community can take and with the mutations
of communities throughout history (problems tackled by Bataille both in the
Collège lectures and in La Part maudite) must value the community itself (and
the definitive form(s) it will take at the ‘‘end of history’’) over a radical negativ-
ity that is in itself unknowable and ungraspable.
    But the Acéphale writings apparently go in the opposite direction: the last
issue of Acéphale,   number   5, appearing   in June    1939 (and entitled ‘‘Madness,
War, and Death’’), puts forward a largely individual experience, which seems
to go beyond the constraints of any notion of community, sect, or life itself
(‘““The Practice of Joy before Death’’).
    It would seem that either direction would lead to an impasse. The valuing of
community or society over the radicality of experience itself would, in the end,
result in a vision of an ultimate homogeneous social structure that uses sacrifice
or festivals; such a community could not be seen as different in kind from a
bourgeois and finally even a Marxist society erected on the principles of classical
utility (that is, on the denial of expenditure without return). This at least would
be the necessary point of view of the ‘“acephalic’’ position. On the other hand,
the sheer negativity of the individual or the elite Acéphale group, seen for a
moment from the point of view of the larger community, can only be a nihilistic
emptiness that, headless or not, elevates itself as an absolute and therefore leads
at best to simple individual death or wandering, and at worst to extremely sin-
                                    INTRODUCTION         U   xxilii


ister political configurations (regimes of the right are only too happy, as is well
known, to make use of previously unharnessed violence).
    At this point we do not want to suggest that there is necessarily a solution
to this problem; indeed it is probably not solvable. But this very insolvability
may be the most radical moment in Bataille’s text, a moment of automutilation
or ‘‘nonlogical difference’’ in which two necessary and incompatible positions
impossibly meet. Bataille’s radicality, then, may stem not so much from the con-
tent of his ‘‘positions’’ themselves as from their violent interaction. This may
in fact be one of the things implied in Bataille’s statement ‘1 MYSELF AM WAR”
(in *“The Practice of Joy before Death’’). It should be remembered that at no
time in the later 1930s—or after, for that matter—did Bataille deny or refuse
Kojève’s Marxist Hegel (see, in this context, the ‘‘Letter to X, Teacher of a
Course on Hegel’’ [1937; V, 369-71]). Yet the joining of a constructive dialectic
of any sort, or its telos, to a definitively ‘‘unemployable’’ negativity could only
result in a profoundly fissured writing.?? One can in fact follow this fissure in
Bataille’s writings of the war years and the postwar period: the aphoristic
Somme Athéologique (1943-45; The Summa Atheologica, untranslated), which
values individual contingency, loss, and fragmentation, is doubled and defied by
another group of texts, including La Part maudite and L ’Erotisme,                        which put
forward a finally coherent theory of history and society (a society that has
expenditure as its most fundamental phenomenon).
   We    must not conclude        from this, however,         that Bataille’s text, in its auto-
mutilation, is simply a sterile (antisocial and apolitical) negativity into which one
willingly enters and which leads nowhere but ever further into itself. If Bataille’s
text is double, it leads necessarily and impossibly in two directions at once: to
choose one direction—in this case one that leads away from society and social
analysis—at the expense of the other is to reduce a bicephalic text to a mono-
cephalic one, to choose the secret rites of the Acéphale (performed this time with
only a text as the victim and the labyrinth) and to refuse the public and even
political activity of the Collège. This is a choice that Bataille himself refused to
make. And in the current ‘‘end of history’’ the labor of the ‘‘recognition’’ of
unrecognizable negativity has just begun.

                                                 Notes

     1. All references to Bataille in French, unless otherwise noted, are to the Oeuvres Complètes
in nine volumes (so far) (Paris: Gallimard, 1970—). The volume number precedes the page number.
Histoire de l'oeil (1928) has been published in a translation by J. Neugroschel as Story of the Eye
(New York: Urizen Books, 1977). The description of Bataille’s father is on pp. 106-10 of the En-
glish translation.
      2. See Denis Hollier’s La Prise de la Concorde: Essais sur Georges Bataille (Paris: Gallimard,
1974) for an examination of the importance of architecture’s rise and fall in Bataille.
     3. As recounted in Histoire de l’oeil (I, 52-56) and Story of the Eye, pp. 72-74.
                                               xxiv (J INTRODUCTION


    4. See Le Bleu du ciel, in volume III of the Qeuvres Complétes.                    The English translation, by
H. Mathews, is Blue of Noon (New York: Urizen Books, 1978).
     5. Michel Leiris, ‘‘De Bataille I'Impossible a 1'impossible Documents’’                        in Brisées (Paris:
Mercure        de France,     1966), p. 258.      This article originally appeared     in Critigue     195-96       (1963),
Hommage a Georges Bataille.
     6. Documents 1. no. 4 (1929): 216.
     7. André Breton, Manifestoes of Surrealism, trans. R. Seaver and H. R. Lane (Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1969).
      8. See Hollier’s La Prise de la Concorde, p. 202. 1 am indebted to Hollier’s analysis of the
Bataille-Breton conflict, especially in regard to the question of ‘‘pathology.”’
      9. For more on the ‘‘Pineal Eye’’ in Bataille, and its implications for philosophy, see Rodolphe
Gasché’s System und Metaphorik in der Philosophie von Georges Bataille (Bern: Peter Lang, 1978).
    The ‘‘Pineal Eye’’ writings may be the ‘‘unpublished essay on the inferiority complex,’’ of
which ‘“The ‘Lugubrious Game’ ’’ is a part. See ‘‘The ‘Lugubrious Game,’ '’ note 1.
    10. Fletcher introduces the term kosmos to indicate a visual-allegorical representation:
   Just how kosmos is the essential type of an allegorical image will appear as soon as the
   term is defined. It signifies 1) a universe, and 2) a symbol that implies a rank in a hier-
   archy.       As the latter it will be attached      to, or associated   with,   or even     substituted   for,
   any object which the writer wants to place in hierarchical position. The classic example
   of kosmos is the jewelry worn by a lady to show her social status, or any other such
   sartorial emblems of position.
          As    in English,    the Greek   term    kosmos   has a double   meaning,    since    it denotes   both    a
   large-scale order (macrocosmos)                and the small-scale sign of that order (microcosmos).

    See Angus Fletcher, Allegory (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1964), pp. 109-110.
    11. Bataille’s anal sun can be seen shining (or defecating) in two of Jacques Derrida’s most
important essays: ‘‘La Mythologie blanche,’’ in Marges de la philosophie (Paris: Minuit, 1972), pp.
247-324 (**The White Mythology,*’ in Margins of Philosophy, trans. A. Bass [Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1982], pp. 207-71); and ‘‘La Pharmacie de Platon,’’ in La Dissémination (Paris:
Seuil, 1972), pp. 69-197 (‘‘Plato’s Pharmacy,”’ in Dissemination, trans. B. Johnson [Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1981], pp. 61-171).
     12. See Joseph Libertson, ‘‘Bataille and Communication: From Heterogeneity to Continuity,""
in MLN 89 (May 1974): 669-98, for an examination of the changing meaning of the word hetero-
geneity in Bataille’s writing.
     13. Alexandre Kojève, Introduction à la lecture de Hegel, ed. R. Queneau                       (Paris: Gallimard,
1947). See especially Appendix II, ‘‘L’Idée de la mort dans la philosophie de Hegel,"’ pp. 527-73.
Translated as Introduction to the Reading of Hegel, assembled by R. Queneau, trans. J. H. Nichols,
Jr., ed. A. Bloom (New York: Basic Books, 1969). Unfortunately, this reediting of the Queneau
edition omits the important essay ‘‘L’Idée de la mort dans la philosophie de Hegel.”’
     14. See Emile Durkheim, Les Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse (Paris: Alcan, 1912) (The
Elementary Forms of the Religious Life, trans. J. W. Swain [London: Allen and Unwin, 1926]);
Roger Caillois, L’Homme et le sacré (Paris: Gallimard, 1939) (Man and the Sacred, trans. M.
Barash [Glencoe, IHl.: The Free Press of Glencoe, 1960]); René Girard, La Violence et le sacré
(Paris: Grasset, 1972) (Violence and the Sacred, trans. P. Gregory [Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1977]).
     For a detailed analysis of the influence of Mauss and Durkheim on Bataille, see Michele Rich-
man's Reading Georges Bataille: Beyond the Gift (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
1982).
    15. See ‘“The Collége de Sociologie:              Paradox of an Active Sociology,’’ by Roger Caillois. In
                                      INTRODUCTION          O   xxv


Sub-Stance 11-12 (1975): 61-64. This short article is a concise statement of Caillois’s objections
to Bataille and Bataille’s projects.               .
    16. Drieu La Rochelle, Avec Doriot (Paris: Gallimard,       1937). See especially the article ‘*‘Noél
pour le peuple,’’ pp. 111-15.                                         \
    17. Denis Hollier has edited all the lectures given by Bataille and the other Collège contributors
in Le Collége de Sociologie (Paris: Gallimard, Collection ‘‘Idées,’’ 1979).
     18. The reader will note many parallels between the projects of Bataille and Benjamin. Benjamin
too attempted to find an alternative to both idealism and traditional materialism (which starts out with
material facts but then goes ‘“beyond’’ them to construct an abstract, conceptual edifice). Benjamin’s
way out was to propose his theory of ‘‘constellations,’” which involved a materialism that recognizes
empirical facts, but which refuses to situate them in a higher ‘‘order.’’ See especially the ‘‘Epistemo-
Critical Prologue’’ of Benjamin’s Origin of German Tragic Drama, trans. J. Osborne (London:
NLB, 1977), pp. 27-56. On ‘‘Constellations,’’ see Susan Buck-Morss, The Origin of Negative Dia-
lectics (New York: The Free Press, 1977), pp. 90-95.
    Bataille states in ‘‘The Psychological Structure of Fascism’’ that ‘‘Heterogeneous reality is that
of a force or shock,’’ and Benjamin as well was concerned with shock and (like Bataille) with situat-
ing shock in relation to the dialectic or the progression of history. But, especially in the later Benja-
min, this shock (when in history) comes to be associated with the ‘‘Messiah’’ or with ‘‘Messianic
time,’’ whereas for Bataille the experience of heterogeneous shock is associated precisely with the
death of God. See Benjamin’s ‘‘Theses on the Philosophy of History,’” in Illuminations, trans. H.
Zohn, ed. H. Arendt (New York: Shocken Books, 1969), pp. 253-64. (On Benjamin at the Collège,
see Hollier’s Collège de Sociologie, p. 586).
     19. Bataille expressed his marginal relation to Heidegger in this way: ‘‘Even more than the text
of Volume One of Being and Time ( . . . ) Heidegger’s inability to finish it by writing Volume
Two underlined my similarity to him’’ (V, 217). Bataille is similar to the great philosopher not only
in his ideas, but above all in his silences, his incoherencies, his inability to express his (non)
‘“‘ideas.”’
     20. See the letter of Leiris to Bataille, written on July 3, 1939 (II, 454-55).
     21. L'Erotisme (Paris: Minuit, 1957) has not yet been collected in Bataille’s Oeuvres Complètes.
L'Erotisme has been translated as Death and Sensuality, ed. R. Kastenbaum (1962; reprint, New
York: Arno, 1977).
     22. Bataille’s position vis-a-vis Marxism is, to say the least, a complex one. While it seems that,
at least up until 1936, Bataille was trying to join his notion of expenditure to the negativity envisaged
by Marxism, it is clear that already in 1935, in his novel Le Bleu du ciel (Blue of Noon), Bataille
recognizes a rending conflict between a devotion to expenditure and a devotion to the revolutionary
productivity and utility valorized by Marxism. In his later writings (of the 1940s and 50s) Bataille
is no longer overtly Marxist, but the problem of inner conflict or sundering, outlined in Le Bleu du
ciel, remains constant. See, in this context, the chapters ‘‘Politics, Mutilation, Writing: Bataille’s
Le Bleu du ciel’’ and ‘‘Betrayal in the Later Bataille’’ in my book Politics, Writing, Mutilation: The
Cases of Bataille, Blanchot, Roussel, Leiris, and Ponge, forthcoming from the University of Minne-
sota Press.
     Bataille’s ‘‘Letter to X’' (Kojève) of 1937, pertinent in this context, while not in the present col-
lection, will be included in the translation of Denis Hollier’s anthology, Le Collége de Sociologie,
forthcoming from the University of Minnesota Press.
I
(1927-1930)
Figure 1. Bataille (left) with his father and brother, ca. 1898. (Photo courtesy
of Société Nouvelle des Editions Pauvert.)
[Dream]|]




In the street in front of the house we lived in in Reims. I leave on a bicycle.
Paved street and streetcar rails. very annoying on a bicycle. paved street one
doesn’t know whether to go left or right. multiplication of streetcar rails. I brush
against a streetcar but there is no accident. I would like to reach the place where
after a turn there is a smooth road but from now on it is no doubt too late and
the wonderful smooth road on which you go up and then down with the speed
you gain [is] now paved. In fact when I turn the road is no longer as it was before
they redid it but in order to redo it they have transformed it into an immense
trench in which pronounced             l      |        stand out. I see these strong
supports but more and more I see them in precarious forms first they are formed
by the frames of barrels with disjointed planks in circles that will have to be
filled with earth then more and more disjointed barrels to erect. One proceeds
as it follows extremely virile and brutal cellar workers and even [horrible
blacks] arrive to set up the long and thin tottering barrel. Suddenly an atrocious
darkness descends; I go around in the form of an American gentleman. To erect
the barrel it is necessary to pull on thick cords black with soot on which animals
such as enormous atrocious rats are hung by the tail but which threaten to bite,
but they must be killed. The cellar workers are with great pleasure in contact
with this scum which they joyfully hang up but the American visitor in his suit
risks being stained and bitten and he is not a little disgusted and frightened. how-
ever he stands his ground with difficulty the slimy and bloody fish or dead but
menacing rats at the level of his face.
    The association was thus established.
                                   4 (] [DREAM]

    Horrible rats and all the terrors of childhood. The cellar one goes down into
with a candle.
    Terror of spiders.
    And then suddenly I remember having gone down into the cellar with my
father, a candle in my hand. Dream of the bear with a candlestick.
    Terrors of childhood spiders etc. linked to the memory of having my pants
pulled down on my father’s knees.
    Kind of ambivalence between the most horrible and the most magnificent.

    I see him spread his obscene hands over me with a bitter and blind smile. This
memory seems to be the most terrible of all. One day returning from vacation
I find him again showing me the same affection.

    Waking up I associate the horror of rats with the memory of my father cor-
recting me with a blow in the form of a bloody toad into which a vulture (my
father) sinks his beak. My buttocks are bare and my stomach is bloody. Very
blinding memory like the sun seen through the lids of closed eyes, in red. My
father himself, I imagine that, since he is blind, he also sees the sun in blinding
red. Parallel to this memory my father sitting.

   This has the effect of reminding me that my father being young would have
wanted to do something atrocious to me with pleasure.

  l’m something like three years old my legs naked on my father’s knees and
my penis bloody like the sun.

   This for playing with a hoop.
   My father slaps me and I see the sun.
The Solar Anus




It is clear that the world is purely parodic, in other words, that each thing seen
is the parody of another, or is the same thing in a deceptive form.
     Ever since sentences started to circulate in brains devoted to reflection, an
effort at total identification has been made, because with the aid of a copula each
sentence ties one thing to another; all things would be visibly connected if one
could discover at a single glance and in its totality the tracings of an Ariadne’s
thread leading thought into its own labyrinth.
    But the copula of terms is no less irritating than the copulation of bodies. And
when I scream I AM THE SUN an integral erection results, because the verb
to be is the vehicle of amorous frenzy.

   Everyone is aware that life is parodic and that it lacks an interpretation.
   Thus lead is the parody of gold.
   Air is the parody of water.
   The brain is the parody of the equator.
   Coitus is the parody of crime.

   Gold, water, the equator, or crime can each be put forward as the principle
of things.
   And if the origin of things is not like the ground of the planet that seems to
be the base, but like the circular movement that the planet describes around a
mobile center, then a car, a clock, or a sewing machine could equally be ac-
cepted as the generative principle.
                             6 U THE SOLAR ANUS


   The two primary motions are rotation and sexual movement, whose combina-
tion is expressed by the locomotive’s wheels and pistons.
    These two motions are reciprocally transformed, the one into the other.
    Thus one notes that the earth, by turning, makes animals and men have
coitus, and (because the result is as much the cause as that which provokes it)
that animals and men make the earth turn by having coitus.
   It is the mechanical combination or transformation of these movements that
the alchemists sought as the philosopher’s stone.
   It is through the use of this magically valued combination that one can deter-
mine the present position of men in the midst of the elements.

   An abandoned shoe, a rotten tooth, a snub nose, the cook spitting in the soup
of his masters are to love what a battle flag is to nationality.
    An umbrella, a sexagenarian, a seminarian, the smell of rotten eggs, the
hollow eyes of judges are the roots that nourish love.
    A dog devouring the stomach of a goose, a drunken vomiting woman, a sob-
bing accountant, a jar of mustard represent the confusion that serves as the
vehicle of love.

   A man who finds himself among others is irritated because he does not know
why he is not one of the others.
   In bed next to a girl he loves, he forgets that he does not know why he is
himself instead of the body he touches.
   Without knowing it, he suffers from the mental darkness that keeps him from
screaming that he himself is the girl who forgets his presence while shuddering
in his arms.
   Love, or infantile rage, or a provincial dowager’s vanity, or clerical pornog-
raphy, or the diamond of a soprano bewilder individuals forgotten in dusty apart-
ments.
   They can very well try to find each other; they will never find anything but
parodic images, and they will fall asleep as empty as mirrors.

   The absent and inert girl hanging dreamless from my arms is no more foreign
to me than the door or window through which I can look or pass.
   I rediscover indifference (allowing her to leave me) when I fall asleep,
through an inability to love what happens.
   It is impossible for her to know whom she will rediscover when I hold her,
because she obstinately attains a complete forgetting.
   The planetary systems that turn in space like rapid disks, and whose centers
also move, describing an infinitely larger circle, only move away continuously
from their own position in order to return to it, completing their rotation.
                              THE SOLAR ANUS     O 7

   Movement is the figure of love, incapable of stopping at a particular being,
and rapidly passing from one to another.
   But the forgetting that determines it in this way is only a subterfuge of
memory.

   A man gets up as brusquely as a specter on a coffin and falls in the same way.
   He gets up a few hours later and then he falls again, and the same thing
happens every day; this great coitus with the celestial atmosphere is regulated
by the terrestrial rotation around the sun.
   Thus even though terrestrial life moves to the rhythm of this rotation, the
image of this movement is not the turning earth, but the male shaft penetrating
the female and almost entirely emerging, in order to reenter.

    Love and life appear to be separate only because everything on earth is
broken apart by vibrations of various amplitudes and durations.
    However, there are no vibrations that are not conjugated with a continuous
circular movement; in the same way, a locomotive rolling on the surface of the
earth is the image of a continuous metamorphosis.

   Beings only die to be born, in the manner of phalluses that leave bodies in
order to enter them.
   Plants rise in the direction of the sun and then collapse in the direction of the
ground.
   Trees bristle the ground with a vast quantity of flowered shafts raised up to
the sun.
   The trees that forcefully soar end up burned by lightning, chopped down, or
uprooted. Returned to the ground, they come back up in another form.
   But their polymorphous coitus is a function of uniform terrestrial rotation.

   The simplest image of organic life united with rotation is the tide.
   From the movement of the sea, uniform coitus of the earth with the moon,
comes the polymorphous and organic coitus of the earth with the sun.
   But the first form of solar love is a cloud raised up over the liquid element.
   The erotic cloud sometimes becomes a storm and falls back to earth in the
form of rain, while lightning staves in the layers of the atmosphere.
   The rain is soon raised up again in the form of an immobile plant.

    Animal life comes entirely from the moyement of the seas and, inside bodies,
life continues to come from salt water.
    The sea, then, has played the role of the female organ that li\quiﬁes under the
excitation of the penis.
                              8 0 THE SOLAR ANUS

   The sea continuously jerks off.
   Solid elements, contained and brewed in water animated by erotic movement,
shoot out in the form of flying fish.
    The erection and the sun scandalize, in the same way as the cadaver and the
darkness of cellars.
    Vegetation is uniformly directed towards the sun; human beings, on the other
hand, even though phalloid like trees, in opposition to the other animals, neces-
sarily avert their eyes.
   Human    eyes tolerate neither sun, coitus,   cadavers,   nor obscurity,   but with
different reactions.

   When my face is flushed with blood, it becomes red and obscene.
    It betrays at the same time, through morbid reflexes, a bloody erection and
a demanding thirst for indecency and criminal debauchery.
    For that reason I am not afraid to affirm that my face is a scandal and that
my passions are expressed only by the JESUVE.
    The terrestrial globe is covered with volcanoes, which serve as its anus.
    Although this globe eats nothing, it often violently ejects the contents of its
entrails.
    Those contents shoot out with a racket and fall back, streaming down the
sides of the Jesuve, spreading death and terror everywhere.

   In fact, the erotic movements of the ground are not fertile like those of the
water, but they are far more rapid.
   The earth sometimes jerks off in a frenzy, and everything collapses on its
surface.

   The Jesuve is thus the image of an erotic movement that burglarizes the ideas
contained in the mind, giving them the force of a scandalous eruption.

   This eruptive force accumulates in those who are necessarily situated below.
   Communist workers appear to the bourgeois to be as ugly and dirty as hairy
sexual organs, or lower parts; sooner or later there will be a scandalous eruption
in the course of which the asexual noble heads of the bourgeois will be chopped
off.

   Disasters, revolutions, and volcanoes do not make love with the stars.
   The erotic revolutionary and volcanic deflagrations antagonize the heavens.
   As in the case of violent love, they take place beyond the constraints of
fecundity.
   In opposition to celestial fertility there are terrestrial disasters, the image of
                                 THE SOLAR    ANUS    O   9


terrestrial love without     condition,   erection   without   escape   and   without   rule,
scandal, and terror.


   Love, then, screams in my own throat; I am the Jesuve, the filthy parody of
the torrid and blinding sun.
    [ want to have my throat slashed while violating the girl to whom I will have
been able to say: you are the night.
   The   Sun   exclusively   loves the Night and directs       its luminous    violence,   its
ignoble shaft, toward the earth, but it finds itself incapable of reaching the gaze
or the night, even though the nocturnal terrestrial expanses head continuously
toward the indecency of the solar ray.

   The solar annulus 1s the intact anus of her body at eighteen years to which
nothing sufficiently blinding can be compared except the sun, even though the
anus is the night.
The Language of Flowers




It is vain to consider, in the appearance of things, only the intelligible signs that
allow the various elements to be distinguished from each other. What strikes
human eyes determines not only the knowledge of the relations between various
objects, but also a given decisive and inexplicable state of mind. Thus the sight
of a flower reveals, it is true, the presence of this well-defined part of a plant,
but it is impossible to stop at this superficial observation; in fact, the sight of
this flower provokes in the mind    much   more significant reactions, because the
flower expresses an obscure vegetal resolution. What the configuration and
color of the corolla reveal, what the dirty traces of pollen or the freshness of
the pistil betray doubtless cannot be adequately expressed by language; it is,
however, useless to ignore (as is generally done) this inexpressible real presence
and to reject as puerile absurdities certain attempts at symbolic interpretation.

    That most of the juxtapositions of the language of flowers would have a for-
tuitous and superficial character could be foreseen even before consulting the
traditional list. If the dandelion conveys expansion, the narcissus egoism, and
the wormwood flower bitterness, one can all too easily see why. At stake here
is clearly not the divination of the secret meaning of flowers, and one can easily
make out the well-known property or the adequate legend. One would look in
vain, moreover, for parallels that strikingly convey a hidden understanding of
the things here in question. It matters little, in fact, that the columbine is the
emblem of sadness, the snapdragon the emblem of desire, the waterlilly the
emblem of indifference . . . It seems opportune to recognize that such approx-

                                           10
                       THE LANGUAGE      OF FLOWERS    O   H

imations can be renewed at will, and it suffices to assign a primordial importance
to much simpler interpretations, such as those that link the rose or the spurge
to love. Not that, doubtless, these two flowers alone can designate human
love—even if there is a more exact correspondence (as when one has the spurge
say: ‘‘It is you who have awakened my love,’’ so troubling when conveyed by
such a shady flower), it is to flowers in general, and not to any specific flower,
that one is tempted to attribute the strange privilege of revealing the presence
of love.
   But this interpretation seems unsurprising: in fact love can be posited from
the outset as the natural function of the flower. Thus the symbolic quality would
be due, even here, to a distinct property and not to an appearance that myste-
riously strikes the human sensibility. Therefore it would only have a purely sub-
jective value. Men have linked the brilliance of flowers to their amorous
emotions because, on either side, it is a question of phenomena that precede fer-
tilization. The role given to symbols in psychoanalytic interpretations, more-
over, would corroborate an explanation of this type. In fact it is almost always
an accidental parallel that accounts for the origin of substitutions in dreams.
Among other things, the value given to pointed or hollowed-out objects is fairly
well known.
    In this way one quickly dismisses the opinion that external forms, whether
seductive or horrible, reveal certain crucial resolutions in all phenomena, which
human resolutions would only amplify. Thus there would be good reason to re-
nounce immediately the possibility of replacing the word with the appearance
as an element of philosophical analysis. It would be easy to show that only the
word allows one to consider the characteristics of things that determine a relative
situation, in other words the properties that permit an external action. Neverthe-
less, the appearance would introduce the decisive values of things . . .

    It appears at first that the symbolic meaning of flowers is not necessarily de-
rived from their function. It is evident, in fact, that if one expresses love with
the aid of a flower, it is the corolla, rather than the useful organs, that becomes
the sign of desire.
    But here a specious objection could be raised against interpretation through
the objective value of appearance. In fact the substitution of juxtaposed elements
for essential elements is consistent with all that we spontaneously know about
the emotions that motivate us, since the object of human love is never an organ,
but the person who has the organ. Thus the attribution of the corolla to love can
easily be explained: if the sign of love is displaced from the pistil and stamens
to the surrounding petals, it is because the human mind is accustomed to making
such a displacement with regard to people. But even though there is an undeni-
able parallelism in the two substitutions, it would be necessary to attribute to
some puerile Providence a singular desire to satisfy people’s manias: how in fact
                        12 O THE LANGUAGE      OF FLOWERS

can one explain how these garish elements, automatically substituted for the
essential organs of the flower, develop in such a brilliant way?
    It would obviously be simpler to recognize the aphrodisiac properties of
flowers, such as odor and appearance, which have aroused men’s and women'’s
amorous feelings over the centuries. Something is explosively propagated in
nature, in the springtime, in the same way that bursts of laughter are propagated,
step by step, each one provoking and intensifying the next. Many things can be
altered in human societies, but nothing will prevail against the natural truth that
a beautiful woman or a red rose signifies love.

    An equally inexplicable and equally immutable reaction gives the girl and the
rose a very different value: that of ideal beauty. There are, in fact, a multitude
of beautiful flowers, since the beauty of flowers is even less rare than the beauty
of girls, and characteristic of this organ of the plant. It is surely impossible to
use an abstract formula to account for the elements that can give the flower this
quality. It is interesting to observe, however, that if one says that flowers are
beautiful, it is because they seem to conform to what must be, in other words
they represent, as flowers, the human ideal.
    At least at first glance, and in general: in fact, most flowers are badly devel-
oped and are barely distinguishable from foliage; some of them are even un-
pleasant, if not hideous. Moreover, even the most beautiful flowers are spoiled
in their centers by hairy sexual organs. Thus the interior of a rose does not at
all correspond to its exterior beauty; if one tears off all of the corolla’s petals,
all that remains is a rather sordid tuft. Other flowers, it is true, present very
well-developed and undeniably elegant stamens, but appealing again to common
sense, it becomes clear on close examination that this elegance is rather satanic:
thus certain kinds of fat orchids, plants so shady that one is tempted to attribute
to them the most troubling human perversions. But even more than by the filth
of its organs, the flower is betrayed by the fragility of its corolla: thus, far from
answering the demands of human ideas, it is the sign of their failure. In fact,
after a very short period of glory the marvelous corolla rots indecently in the
sun, thus becoming, for the plant, a garish withering. Risen from the stench of
the manure pile—even though it seemed for a moment to have escaped it in a
flight of angelic and lyrical purity—the flower seems to relapse abruptly into its
original squalor: the most ideal is rapidly reduced to a wisp of aerial manure.
For flowers do not age honestly like leaves, which lose nothing of their beauty,
even after they have died; flowers wither like old and overly made-up dowagers,
and they die ridiculously on stems that seemed to carry them to the clouds.
    It is impossible to exaggerate the tragicomic oppositions indicated in the
course of this death-drama, endlessly played out between earth and sky, and it
is evident that one can only paraphrase this laughable duel by introducing, not
                        THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS          O   13

as a sentence, but more precisely as an ink stain, this nauseating banality: love
smells like death. It seems, in fact, that desire has nothing to do with ideal
beauty, or, more precisely, that it only arises in order to stain and wither the
beauty that for many sad and well-ordered personalities is only a limit, a cate-
gorical imperative. The most admirable flower for that reason would not be
represented, following the verbiage of the old poets, as the faded expression of
an angelic ideal, but, on the contrary, as a filthy and glaring sacrilege.

   There is good reason to insist upon the exception represented, in this respect,
by the flower on the plant. In fact, if one continues to apply the method of inter-
pretation introduced here, on the whole the external part of the plant is endowed
with an unambiguous meaning. The appearance of leafy stems generally gives
the impression of strength and dignity. Without a doubt the insane contortions
of tendrils and the unusual lacerations of foliage bear witness to the fact that all
is not uniformly correct in the impeccable erection of plants. But nothing con-
tributes more strongly to the peace in one’s heart and to the lifting of one’s spir-
its, as well as to one’s loftier notions of justice and rectitude, than the spectacle
of fields and forests, along with the tiniest parts of the plant, which sometimes
manifest a veritable architectural order, contributing to the general impression
of correctness. No crack, it seems—one could stupidly say no quack—con-
spicuously troubles the decisive harmony of vegetal nature. Flowers themselves,
lost in this immense movement from earth to sky, are reduced to an episodic
role, to a diversion, moreover, that is apparently misunderstood: they can only
contribute, by breaking the monotony, to the inevitable seductiveness produced
by the general thrust from low to high. And in order to destroy this favorable
impression, nothing less 1s necessary than the impossible and fantastic vision of
roots swarming under the surface of the soil, nauseating and naked like vermin.
    Roots, in fact, represent the perfect counterpart to the visible parts of a plant.
While the visible parts are nobly elevated, the ignoble and sticky roots wallow
in the ground, loving rottenness just as leaves love light. There 1s reason to note,
moreover, that the incontestable moral value of the term base conforms to this
systematic interpretation of the meaning of roots: what is evil is necessarily
represented, among movements, by a movement from high to low. That fact is
impossible to explain if one does not assign moral meaning to natural phenom-
ena, from which this value is taken, precisely because of the striking character
of the appearance, the sign of the decisive movements of nature.
    Besides, it would seem impossible to eliminate an opposition as flagrant as
the one that differentiates stem from root. One legend in particular demonstrates
the morbid interest, which has always been more or less pronounced, in the parts
that shove themselves into the earth. The obscenity of the mandrake root is
undoubtedly fortuitous, like the majority of specific symbolic interpretations,
                        14 0   THE   LANGUAGE   OF FLOWERS


but it is no coincidence that this type of emphasis, to which the mandrake root
owes a legendary satanism, is based on an obviously ignoble form. The symbolic
values of the carrot and the turnip are also fairly well known.
    It was more difficult to show that the same opposition appeared in an isolated
part of the plant, the flower, where it takes on an exceptionally dramatic
meaning.

    There can be no doubt: the substitution of natural forms for the abstractions
currently used by philosophers will seem not only strange but absurd. It is prob-
ably fairly unimportant that philosophers themselves have often had to have
recourse, though with repugnance, to terms that derive their value from the
production of these forms in nature, as when they speak of baseness. No blind-
ness interferes with defending the perogatives of abstraction. This substitution,
moreover,   threatens to carry one too far: it would   result, in the first place, in
a feeling of freedom, the free availability of oneself in every sense, which is
absolutely unbearable for the most part, and the troubling contempt for all that
is still—thanks to miserable evasions—elevated, noble, sacred . . . Don’t all
these beautiful things run the risk of being reduced to a strange mise en scéne,
destined to make sacrilege more impure? And the disconcerting gesture of the
Marquis de Sade, locked up with madmen, who had the most beautiful roses
brought to him only to pluck off their petals and toss them into a ditch filled with
liquid manure—in these circumstances, doesn’t it have an overwhelming
impact?
Materialism




Most materialists, even though they may have wanted to do away with all spiri-
tual entities, ended up positing an order of things whose hierarchical relations
mark it as specifically idealist. They situated dead matter at the summit of a con-
ventional hierarchy of diverse facts, without perceiving that in this way they
gave in to an obsession with the ideal form of matter, with a form that was closer
than any other to what matter should be. Dead matter, the pure idea, and God
in fact answer a question in the same way (in other words perfectly, and as flatly
as the docile student in a classroom)—a question that can only be posed by phi-
losophers, the question of the essence of things, precisely of the idea by which
things become intelligible. Classical materialists did not really even substitute
causation for the must be (the quare for the quamobrem, or, in other words,
determinism for destiny, the past for the future). Their need for external author-
ity in fact placed the must be of all appearance in the functional role they uncon-
sciously assigned the idea of science. If the principle of things they defined is
precisely the stable element that permitted science to constitute an apparently
unshakeable position, a veritable divine eternity, this choice cannot be attributed
to chance. The conformity of dead matter to the idea of science is, among most
materialists, substituted for the religious relations earlier established between the
divinity and his creatures, the one being the idea of the others.
    Materialism will be seen as a senile idealism to the extent that it is not imme-
diately based on psychological or social facts, instead of on artificially isolated
physical phenomena. Thus it is from Freud, among others—rather than from
long-dead physicists, whose ideas today have no meaning—that a representation

                                          1S
                                 16 {J MATERIALISM

of matter must be taken. It is of little importance that the fear of psychological
complications (a fear that only bears witness to intellectual weakness) causes
timid souls to see in this attitude an aversion or a return to spiritual values. When
the word materialism is used, it is time to designate the direct interpretation,
excluding all idealism, of raw phenomena, and not a system founded on the frag-
mentary elements of an ideological analysis, elaborated under the sign of reli-
gious relations.
Eye




Cannibal delicacy. 1t is known that civilized man is characterized by an often
inexplicable acuity of horror. The fear of insects is no doubt one of the most
singular and most developed of these horrors as is, one is surprised to note, the
fear of the eye. It seems impossible, in fact, to judge the eye using any word
other than seductive, since nothing is more attractive in the bodies of animals
and men. But extreme seductiveness is probably at the boundary of horror.
    In this respect, the eye could be related to the cutting edge, whose appearance
provokes both bitter and contradictory reactions; this is what the makers of the
Andalusian Dog' must have hideously and obscurely experienced when, among
the first images of the film, they determined the bloody loves of these two
beings. That a razor would cut open the dazzling eye of a young and charming
woman—this is precisely what a young man would have admired to the point
of madness, a young man watched by a small cat, a young man who by chance
holding in his hand a coffee spoon, suddenly wanted to take an eye in that spoon.
    Obviously a singular desire on the part of a white, from whom the eyes of
the cows, sheep, and pigs that he eats have always been hidden. For the eye—as
Stevenson exquisitely puts it, a cannibal delicacy—is, on our part, the object of
such anxiety that we will never bite into it. The eye is even ranked high in hor-
ror, since it is, among other things, the eye of conscience. Victor Hugo’s poem
is sufficiently well known; the obsessive and lugubrious eye, the living eye, the
eye that was hideously dreamed by Grandville in a nightmare he had shortly
before his death;? the criminal ‘“dreams that he has just struck down a man in
a dark wood . . . Human blood has been spilled and, to use an expression that

                                         17
                                  18 □ EYE




Figure 2. Last illustrations of J. J. Grandville: “ First Dream: Crime and Ex­
piation” (1847). Phot. Bibl. nat. Paris.
                                               EYE   L] 19

presents a ferocious image to the mind, he made an oak sweat° In fact, it is not
a man, but a tree trunk . . . bloody . . . that thrashes and struggles
     . under the murderous weapon. The hands of the victim are raised, plead-
ing, but in vain. Blood continues to flow.” At that point an enormous eye appears
in the black sky, pursuing the criminal through space and to the bottom of the
sea,     where   1t devours    him    after taking    the form     of a fish.    Innumerable      eyes
nevertheless multiply under the waves.
    On this subject, Grandville writes: ‘‘ Are these the eyes of the crowd attracted
by the imminent spectacle of torture?'’ But why would these absurd eyes be
attracted, like a cloud of flies, by something so repugnant? Why as well, on the
masthead of a perfectly sadistic illustrated weekly, published in Paris from 1907
to 1924, does an eye regularly appear against a red background, above a bloody
spectacle? Why isn’t the Eye of the Police—similar to the eye of human justice
in the nightmare of Grandville—finally only the expression of a blind thirst for
blood? Similar also to the eye of Crampon, condemned to death and approached
by the chaplain an instant before the blade’s fall: he dismissed the chaplain, but
enucleated himself and gave him the happy gift of his torn-out eye, for this eye
was made of glass.

                                                  Notes

       1. This extraordinary film is the work of two young Catalans: the painter Salvador Dali, one
of whose characteristic paintings we reproduce below (p. 25), and the director Luis Bunuel. See the
excellent photographs published by the Cahiers d’art (July 1929, p. 230), by Bifur (August 1929,
p. 105) and by Variétés (July 1929, p. 209). This film can be distinguished from banal avant-garde
productions, with which one might be tempted to confuse it, in that the screenplay predominates.
Several very explicit facts appear in successive order, without logical connection it is true, but pene-
trating so far into horror that the spectators are caught up as directly as they are in adventure films.
Caught up and even precisely caught by the throat, and without artifice; do these spectators know,
in fact, where they—the authors of this film, or people like them—will stop? If Bunuel himself, after
the filming of the slit-open eye, remained sick for a week (he, moreover, had to film the scene of
the asses’ cadavers in a pestilential atmosphere), how then can one not see to what extent horror
becomes     fascinating, and how   it alone is brutal enough to break everything that stifles?
        2. Victor Hugo, a reader of Le Magazin pittoresque, borrowed from the admirable written
dream Crime and Expiation, and from the unprecedented drawing of Grandville, both published in
 1847 (pp. 211-14), the story of the pursuit of a criminal by an obstinate eye; it is scarcely useful
to observe, however, that only an obscure and sinister obsession, and not a cold memory, can ex-
plain this resemblance. We owe to Pierre d’Espezel’s erudition and kindness our awareness of this
curious document, probably the most beautiful of Grandville’s extravagant compositions.
       [The poem by Victor Hugo to which Bataille refers is ‘‘La Conscience’’ (in the collection La
Légende des siècles [Paris: Gallimard, Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, 1950], pp. 26-27). The poem in
fact presents the eye of God following Cain, even into a (self-imposed) tomb. Tr.]
     3. [*‘Faire suer un chéne’’ (literally, *‘to make an oak sweat’’) is a slang expression that could
be translated as ‘‘to exploit a guy'' or ‘‘to rip off a guy.”” Tr.]
The Big Toe




The big toe is the most human part of the human body, in the sense that no other
element of this body is as differentiated from the corresponding element of the
anthropoid ape (chimpanzee, gorilla, orangutan, or gibbon). This is due to the
fact that the ape is tree dwelling, whereas man moves on the earth without cling-
ing to branches, having himself become a tree, in other words raising himself
straight up in the air like a tree, and all the more beautiful for the correctness
of his erection. In addition, the function of the human foot consists in giving a
firm foundation to the erection of which man is so proud (the big toe, ceasing
to grasp branches, is applied to the ground on the same plane as the other
toes).
   But whatever the role played in the erection by his foot, man, who has a light
head, in other words a head raised to the heavens and heavenly things, sees it
as spit, on the pretext that he has this foot in the mud.

    Although within the body blood flows in equal quantities from high to low
and from low to high, there is a bias in favor of that which elevates itself, and
human life is erroneously seen as an elevation. The division of the universe into
subterranean hell and perfectly pure heaven is an indelible conception, mud and
darkness being the principles of evil as light and celestial space are the principles
of good: with their feet in mud but their heads more or less in light, men obsti-
nately imagine a tide that will permanently elevate them, never to return, into
pure space. Human life entails, in fact, the rage of seeing oneself as a back and

                                          20
                                   THE BIG TOE     O 21

forth movement from refuse to the ideal, and from the ideal to refuse—a rage
that is easily directed against an organ as base as the foot.
    The human foot is commonly subjected to grotesque tortures that deform it
and make    it rickety.   In an imbecilic   way   it is doomed   to corns,   calluses,   and
bunions, and if one takes into account turns of phrase that are only now disap-
pearing, to the most nauseating filthiness: the peasant expression ‘“her hands are
as dirty as feet,’” while no longer true of the entire human collectivity, was so
in the seventeenth century.
   Man’s secret horror of his foot is one of the explanations for the tendency
to conceal its length and form as much as possible. Heels of greater or lesser
height, depending on the sex, distract from the foot’s low and flat character.
    Besides, this uneasiness is often confused with a sexual uneasiness; this is
especially striking among the Chinese, who, after having atrophied the feet of
women, situate them at the most excessive point of deviance. The husband him-
self must not see the nude feet of his wife, and it is incorrect and immoral in
general to look at the feet of women. Catholic confessors, adapting themselves
to this aberration, ask their Chinese penitents ‘‘if they have not looked at
women’s feet.”’
    The same aberration is found among the Turks (Volga Turks, Turks of Cen-
tral Asia), who consider it immoral to show their nude feet and who even go
to bed in stockings.
    Nothing similar can be cited from classical antiquity (apart from the use of
very high soles in tragedies). The most prudish Roman matrons constantly
allowed their nude toes to be seen. On the other hand, modesty concerning the
feet developed excessively in the modern era and only started to disappear in
the nineteenth century. M. Salomon Reinach has studied this development in
detail in the article entitled ‘‘Pieds pudiques’’ [‘‘Modest Feet’’],! insisting on
the role of Spain, where women'’s feet have been the object of the most dreaded
anxiety and thus were the cause of crimes. The simple fact of allowing the shod
foot to be seen, jutting out from under a skirt, was regarded as indecent. Under
no circumstances was it possible to touch the foot of a woman, this liberty being,
with one exception, more grave than any other. Of course, the foot of the queen
was the object of the most terrifying prohibition.          Thus,    according to Mme
D’Aulnoy,    the Count of Villamediana,       in love with Queen      Elizabeth, had the
idea of starting a fire in order to have the pleasure of carrying her in his arms:
‘“ Almost the entire house, worth     100,000 écus, was burned, but he was consoled
 by the fact that, taking advantage of so favorable an occasion, he took the sover-
eign in his arms and carried her into a small staircase. He took some liberties
there, and, something very much noticed in this country, he even touched her
foot. A little page saw it, reported it to the king, and the latter had his revenge
 by killing the count with a pistol shot.”
                                  22 [ THE BIG TOE

    It is possible to see in these obsessions,   as M.   Reinach   does, a progressive
refinement of modesty that little by little has been able to reach the calf, the
ankle, and the foot. This explanation, in part well founded, is however not suffi-
cient if one wants to account for the hilarity commonly produced by simply
imagining the toes. The play of fantasies and fears, of human necessities and
aberrations, is in fact such that fingers have come to signify useful action and
firm character, the toes stupor and base idiocy. The vigissitudes of organs, the
profusion of stomachs, larynxes, and brains traversing innumerable animal
species and individuals, carries the imagination along in an ebb and flow it does
not willingly follow, due to a hatred of the still painfully perceptible frenzy of
the bloody palpitations of the body. Man willingly imagines himself to be like
the god Neptune, stilling his own waves, with majesty; nevertheless, the bellow-
ing waves of the viscera, in more or less incessant inflation and upheaval,
brusquely put an end to his dignity. Blind, but tranquil and strangely despising
his obscure baseness, a given person, ready to call to mind the grandeurs of
human history, as when his glance ascends a monument testifying to the gran-
deur of his nation, 1s stopped in mid-flight by an atrocious pain in his big toe
because, though the most noble of animals, he nevertheless has corns on his
feet; in other words, he has feet, and these feet independently lead an ignoble
life.
    Corns on the feet differ from headaches and toothaches by their baseness, and
they are only laughable because of an ignominy explicable by the mud in which
feet are found. Since by its physical attitude the human race distances itself as
much as it can from terrestrial mud—whereas a spasmodic laugh carries joy to
its summit each time its purest flight lands man’s own arrogance spread-eagle
in the mud—one can imagine that a toe, always more or less damaged and humil-
iating, is psychologically analogous to the brutal fall of a man—in other words,
to death. The hideously cadaverous and at the same time loud and proud appear-
ance of the big toe corresponds to this derision and gives a very shrill expression
to the disorder of the human body, that product of the violent discord of the
organs.

   The form of the big toe is not, however, specifically monstrous: in this it is
different from other parts of the body, the inside of a gaping mouth, for ex-
ample. Only secondary (but common) deformations have been able to give its
ignominy an exceptionally burlesque value. Now it is easy, most often, to
account for burlesque values by means of extreme seductiveness. But we are led
here to distinguish categorically two radically opposed kinds of seductiveness
(whose habitual confusion entails the most absurd misunderstandings of
language).
    If a seductive element is to be attributed to the big toe, it is evidently not one
to satisfy such exalted aspirations as, for example, the perfectly indelible taste
                                      THE BIG TOE        ( 23

that, in most cases, leads one to prefer elegant and correct forms. On the con-
trary, if one chooses, for example, the case of the Count of Villamediana, one
can affirm that the pleasure he derived from touching the queen’s foot specifi-
cally derived from the ugliness and infection represented by the baseness of the
foot, in practice by the most deformed feet. Thus, supposing that the queen’s
foot was perfectly pretty, it still derived its sacrilegious charm from deformed
and muddy feet. Since a queen is a priori a more ideal and ethereal being than
any other, it was human to the point of laceration to touch what in fact was not
very different from the stinking foot of a thug. Here one submits to a seduction
radically opposed to that caused by light and ideal beauty; the two orders of
seduction are often confused because a person constantly moves from one to the
other, and, given this back and forth movement,                 whether it finds its end in one
direction or the other, seduction is all the more acute when the movement is
more brutal.
    As for the big toe, classic foot fetishism leading to the licking of toes categori-
cally indicates that it is a phenomenon of base seduction, which accounts for the
burlesque value that is always more or less attached to the pleasures condemned
by pure and superficial men.

   The meaning of this article lies in its insistence on a direct and explicit ques-
tioning of seductiveness, without taking into account poetic concoctions that are,
ultimately, nothing but a diversion (most human beings are naturally feeble and
can only abandon themselves to their instincts when in a poetic haze). A return
to reality does not imply any new acceptances, but means that one is seduced
in a base manner, without transpositions and to the point of screaming, opening
his eyes wide: opening them wide, then, before a big toe.

                                                 Note

    1. In L'Anthropologie,   1903, pp. 733-36;    reprinted in Cultes, mythes et religions,   19035, vol
1, pp. 105-10.
The “Lugubrious Game”




Intellectual despair results in neither weakness nor dreams, but in violence. Thus
abandoning certain investigations is out of the question. It is only a matter of
knowing how to give vent to one’s rage; whether one only wants to wander like
madmen around prisons, or whether one wants to overturn them.!
    To halfheartedness, to loopholes and deliria that reveal a great poetic impo-
tence, one can only oppose a black rage and even an incontestable bestiality; it
is impossible to get worked up other than as a pig who rummages in manure and
mud uprooting everything with his snout—and whose repugnant voracity is
unstoppable.

   If the forms brought together by a painter on a canvas had no repercussion,
and for example, since we are speaking of voracity—even in the intellectual
order—if horrible shadows       that collide in the head,   if jaws   with hideous teeth
had not come out of Picasso’s skull to terrify those who still have the impudence
to think honestly, then painting at the very most would be good for distracting
people from their rage, as do bars or American films. But why hesitate to write
that when Picasso paints, the dislocation of forms leads to that of thought, in
other   words   that the   immediate   intellectual   movement,   which   in other   cases
leads to the idea, aborts. We cannot ignore that flowers are aphrodisiacs, that
a single burst of laughter can traverse and stir up a crowd, that an equally obsti-
nate abortion is the shrill and incendiary blast of the non serviam that the human
brute opposes to the idea. And the idea has over man the same degrading power
that a harness has over a horse; I can snort and gasp: 1 go, no less, right and

                                             24
Figure 3. “ The Lugubrious Game” by Salvador Dali. a S .P .A .D .E .M .,
Par is/V. A .G .A ., New York, 1983.
                                 26 1 THE ‘“LUGUBRIOUS GAME"




B. Désirs du sujet
exprimés par une as-
cension ailée des
objets du désir. Le
caractere   burlesque
et    provoquant       de
cette expression   mar-
que la recherche
volontaire de la
     punition.




                            D. Figuration du
                            sujet contemplant
                            avec complaisance
                            sa   propre     émascu-
                   \        lation     et   donnant
                                     l'amplification
                                        poétique.




            À. Figuration du sujet                     C. Figuration du sujet
            au moment de l'émas-                       souillé échappant     à
            culation. L'émascula-                      Fémasculation par une
            tion est exprimée par                      attitude ignominieuse et
            le déchirement de la                       écœurante.    l.a sowllure
            partie supérieure du                       est à la      fois cause
                    corps.                             primitive    et remède.
                                                       —.




     SCHÉMA PSYCHANALYTIQUE DES FIGURATIONS CONTRADICTOIRES                         DU
     SUJET DANS ‘““LE JEU LUGUBRE’’ DE SALVADOR DALI.
                            THE    ‘‘LUGUBRIOUS       GAME"      [J 27


left, my head bridled and pulled by the idea that brutalizes all men and causes
them to be docile—the idea in the form of, among other things, a piece of paper
adorned with the arms of the State. Taking into account trickery, human life
always more or less conforms to the image of a soldier obeying commands in
his drill. But sudden cataclysms, great popular manifestations of madness, riots,
enormous revolutionary slaughters—all these show the extent of the inevitable
backlash.

   This leads me to state, almost without introduction, that the paintings of
Picasso are hideous, that those of Dali are frighteningly ugly.? One is a victim
of the awkwardness of words, or even of an evil spell resulting from the prac-
tices of black magic, when one attempts to believe otherwise. All it takes is to
imagine suddenly the charming little girl whose soul would be Dali’s abominable
mirror, to measure the extent of the evil. The tongue of this little girl is not a
tongue but a she-rat. And if she still appears admirably beautiful, it is, as they
say, because   black blood      is beautiful,    flowing on the hide of a cow or on the
throat of a woman. (If violent movements manage to rescue a being from pro-
found boredom, it is because they can lead—through some obscure error—to a
ghastly satiating ugliness. It must be said, moreover, that ugliness can be hateful
without any recourse and, as it were, through misfortune, but nothing is more
common than the equivocal ugliness that gives, in a provocative way, the illu-
sion of the opposite. As for irrevocable ugliness, it is exactly as detestable as
certain beauties: the beauty that conceals nothing, the beauty that is not the mask
of ruined immodesty, the beauty that never contradicts itself and remains eter-
nally at attention like a coward.)
    Little by little the contradictory signs of servitude and revolt are revealed in
all things. The great constructions of the intellect are, finally, prisons: that is
why they are obstinately overturned. Dreams and illusory Cimmerii remain
within reach of the zealously irresolute, whose unconscious calculations are not
so clumsy since they innocently shelter revolt from laws. Besides, how could
one not admire the loss of will, the blind manner, the drifting uncertainty rang-


         Figure 4. Psychoanalytic Schema of the Contradictory Representations of the
         Subject in ‘‘Lugubrious Game’’ of Salvador Dali.
         A. Representation of the subject at the moment of emasculation. The emascula-
         tion is expressed by the laceration of the upper part of the body.
         B. The subject’s desires expressed by a winged ascension of the objects of desire.
         The burlesque and provocative character of this expression indicates the voluntary
         pursuit of punishment.
         C. Representation of the soiled subject escaping emasculation through an ig-
         nominious and nauseating posture. The stain is both original cause and remedy.
         D. Representation of the subject contemplating with complacency his own
         emasculation and giving a poetic amplification.
                          28 U THE ‘‘LUGUBRIOUS GAME”

ing from willful distraction to attentiveness? It is true that I am speaking here
of what already sinks into oblivion when Dali’s razors carve into our faces the
grimaces of horror that probably risk making us vomit like drunkards this servile
nobility, this idiotic idealism that leaves us under the spell of a few comical
prison bosses.
    Dogs, vaguely sick from having so long licked the fingers of their masters,
howl themselves to death in the countryside, in the middle of the night. These
frightening howls are answered—as thunder is answered by the racket of rain—
by cries so extreme that one cannot even talk of them without excitement.
    A few days before July 14, 1789, the Marquis de Sade, for years doomed
to rage in his cell in the Bastille, excited the crowd around the prison by scream-
ing insanely into the pipe that was used to carry off his filthy water—an insane
cry that was doubtless the most far-reaching ever to strain a larynx. This scream
is reported historically as follows: ‘‘People of Paris,’’ shouted Sade, ‘‘they are
killing the prisoners!’’ Practically the scream of an old rentière with her throat
slashed at night in a suburb. It is known that Governor Launay, justifiably fright-
ened by the riot that was starting to explode, had the frenzied prisoner trans-
ferred to another prison; this however did not prevent his head, only a few hours
later, from terrifying the town on the end of a pike.
    But if one wants explicitly to account for the excessive character of this
scream, it is necessary to refer to the deposition of Rose Keller, which accuses
Sade of inflicting cruelties upon her. This deposition, recently discovered by M.
Maurice Heine,* is categorical. The young woman recounts that, after being tor-
tured with a whip, she tried to move, with her tears and entreaties, a man both
so pleasing and so evil; and as she invoked everything in the world that was
saintly and touching, Sade, suddenly gone wild and hearing nothing, let out hor-
rifying and perfectly nauseating screams . . .

    It is well known that a long-standing uneasiness, going back a number of
years, has no other meaning than the feeling that something 1s missing from exis-
tence; it is hardiy useful to insist upon the fact that it is for want of the power
to let out or hear such screams that, on all sides, restless people have plainly
lost their heads, condemning human life to boredom and disgust, while pretend-
ing at that very instant to conserve and even to defend it, at the first opportunity,
heroically, against stains that seem to them 1gnoble.
    This is said without any critical intention, for it 1s evident that violence, even
when one is beside oneself with it, is most often of sufficient brutal hilarity to
exceed questions about people. My only desire here—even if by pushing this
bestial hilarity to its furthest point I must nauseate Dali—is to squeal like a pig
before his canvases.

   For reasons which, out of consideration for him, I put off explaining,* Dali
                               THE   ‘’LUGUBRIOUS        GAME'’       L) 29


has refused to allow the reproduction of his paintings in this article, thus doing
me an honor that was as unexpected as I may believe it was persistently sought.
I am not unaware of the cowardice and the poverty of spirit reflected, by and
large, in the attention paid to his recent productions, to minor and major dis-
coveries. Having gotten caught up in the game, I at least have the good fortune
to speak of a man who will necessarily take this article as a provocation and not
as a traditional      bit of flattery,     who    will   hate   me,     as I am   well   aware,    as a
provocateur.
    Nowhere, no doubt, from one end to the other of the regions inhabited by
the bourgeoisie, is there anything going on that is noticeably different from the
rest, from the past, from political traditions, from literary traditions; neverthe-
less, and moreover without attaching any other importance to it, I can say that
from now on it is impossible to retreat and hide in the ‘‘wonderland’’ of Poetry
without being publicly condemned as a coward.

                                                 Notes

      1. This is a portion of an unpublished essay on the inferiority complex. The title is borrowed
from the painting by Salvador Dali, whose schema is reproduced on p. 26 (this painting belongs to
the Viscount de Noailles and appeared in the Dali show at the Galerie Goemans in November 1929).
The Lugubrious Game, as moreover the text of the schema indicates, is nothing other than the com-
plex in question. This complex was already apparent in relatively early Dali paintings. Blood is
Sweeter than Honey (published in Documents 4) is characteristic; the body with the head, hands,
and feet cut off, the head with the face cut, the ass, symbol of grotesque and powerful virility, lying
dead and decomposed, the systematic fragmentation of all the elements of the painting . . .
    Even more explicit is the episode of the sliced eye in An Andalusian Dog, the film of Luis Bunuel
and Salvador Dali (see Documents 4, p. 218, and the text of the screenplay in Revue du cinema,
November 1929, and Révolution surréaliste 12, December 1929).
    Bunuel himself told me that this episode was the invention of Dali, to whom it was directly sug-
gested by the real vision of a narrow and long cloud cutting across the lunar surface (I can add here
that the dead and decomposing asses that reappear in An Andalusian Dog represent an obsession
shared by Bunuel and Dali, and go back for each of them to the identical discovery, during child-
hood, of a decomposing ass-cadaver in the countryside).
     Even the title, Lugubrious Game, adopted by Dali can be taken as an indication of the explicit
value of this painting, in which the genesis of emasculation and the contradictory reactions it carries
with it are translated with an extraordinary wealth of detail and power of expression. Without pre-
tending to exhaust the psychological elements of this painting, I can indicate here their general devel-
opment. The very act of emasculation is expressed by Figure A, whose body, from the waist up,
is completely torn off. The provocation that immediately caused this bloody punishment is expressed
in B by dreams of virility of a puerile and burlesque temerity (the masculine elements are represented
not only by the bird’s head but by the colored umbrella, the feminine elements by men’s hats). But
the profound and early cause of the punishment is nothing other than the ignoble stain of the man
in his underwear (C), a stain moreover without provocation, since a new and real virility is
rediscovered by this person in ignominy and horror themselves. Yet the statue on the left (D) still
personifies the unusual satisfaction found in sudden emasculation and betrays a hardly virile need
for the poetic amplification of the game. The hand concealing the virility of the head is a suppression
of a rule in the painting of Dali, in which persons who for the most part have lost their heads find
them only on the condition that they grimace with horror. This permits one to inquire seriously about
                                30 0   THE   ‘‘“LUGUBRIOUS       GAME”


the orientation of those who see here for the first time the mental windows opening wide, who place
an emasculated poetic complacency where there appears only the screaming necessity of a recourse
to ignominy.
     2. That is, moreover, the only similarity between two bodies of work, which differ from each
other as much as a cloud of flies differs from an elephant.
     3. I must thank M. Maurice Heine, to whom nothing about Sade is unknown, who kindly
authorized me to mention the facts that he recounted orally to me. These facts are found in the depo-
sition of Rose Keller, which is included among the authentic documents of a trial soon to be pub-
lished, through M. Heine's efforts, by Stendhal and Co.
      4. 1 must say that it is not at all a question of something people commonly would call *‘suspect,”’
but certain stories of the ‘‘artistic and literary milieu’’ genre could in any case provoke intractable
disgust.
Formless




A dictionary begins when it no longer gives the meaning of words, but their
tasks. Thus formless is not only an adjective having a given meaning, but a term
that serves to bring things down in the world, generally requiring that each thing
have its form. What it designates has no rights in any sense and gets itself
squashed everywhere, like a spider or an earthworm. In fact, for academic men
to be happy, the universe would have to take shape. All of philosophy has no
other goal: it is a matter of giving a frock coat to what is, a mathematical frock
coat. On the other hand, affirming that the universe resembles nothing and is
only formless amounts to saying that the universe is something like a spider or
spit.




                                        31
The “Old Mole” and the Prefix Sur
in the Words Surhomme
[Superman] and Surrealist




   In history as in nature, decay is the laboratory of life.
                                                                      Karl Marx


If we were to identify under the heading of materialism a crude liberation of
human life from the imprisonment and masked pathology of ethics, an appeal
to all that is offensive, indestructible, and even despicable, to all that over-
throws, perverts, and ridicules spirit, we could at the same time identify surreal-
ism as a childhood disease of this base materialism: it is through this latter iden-
tification that the current prerequisites for a consistent development may be
specified forcefully and in such a manner as to preclude any return to pretentious
idealistic aberrations.
    Sufficient agreement exists concerning present social conditions, bourgeois
moral values, and the intellectual edifice that supports them.      For quite some
time, all thinking that has not undermined this dilapidated edifice has imme-
diately taken on its demeanor of senile trickery and comical smugness.        But it
is useless to insist here on the bankruptcy of bourgeois culture, on the necessity
of destroying one day even its memory, and beginning now to establish a new
basis for mental agitation. To whatever extent the unhappy bourgeois has main-
tained a human vulgarity, a certain taste for virility, disaffection with his own
class quickly turns into stubborn hatred. And we must insist from the outset that
a still relatively new form of intellectual activity, not yet castrated and domesti-
cated, is linked by the force of things to the uprising of the lower classes against
present-day work.

                                          32
                  THE   *“OLD MOLE"   AND       THE   PREFIX   SUR   (] 33


   It remains to be seen how this force acts, how what passes through bourgeois
heads alienated from practical considerations and given over most often to shrill
frenzy can be associated with the ongoing upheaval of all human structures, with
a series of social collapses and catastrophes whose magnitude and character
naturally exceed the reach of even radical ambitions.


                                            I

In the first place, it is not surprising that any subversion within the bourgeois
intellectual domain begins with forms that correspond very imperfectly to the
solution of such difficulties. Instead of relying on presently lower forms whose
interplay will in the end destroy bourgeois prisons, subversion seeks immedi-
ately to create its own values in order to oppose established values, concerned
as it is as much with the stifling effect of the present moral order as with the
material conditions of the proletariat. Thus it finds itself, scarcely alive, search-
ing for an authority above the one that has provoked the revolt. Abused by a
system that threatens to crush or domesticate them,            individuals have put them-
selves, in practical terms, at the mercy of what appears to them, through blind-
ing flashes and disheartening attacks of empty verbiage, to be above all the piti-
ful contingencies of their human existence, for example spirit, surreal, absolute,
etc. At first the ‘‘surrealist revolution’’ was independent of the revolt of the
lower classes, indeed was defined as nothing but a confused mental state to
which was added violent verbiage asserting the necessity of a dictatorship of
spirit. Subsequently surrealism has recognized the legitimacy of the organiza-
tional endeavors and even the principles of Marxist communism, seeing therein
the only means to bring about an indispensable revolution in the real world. But
the surrealists continued persistently to express their basic predilection for
values above the ‘‘world of facts’’ with such banal formulas as ‘‘revolt of the
Spirit,”’ etc. (The Revolution First and Always).
    It is of course difficult to avoid a feeling of contempt for revolutionaries to
whom the revolution is not, before all else, the decisive phase of the class
struggle. Nevertheless we are not concerned with ephemeral reactions, but with
a verification of a general nature: any member of the bourgeoisie who has
become conscious that his most vigorous and vital instincts, if he does not re-
press them, necessarily make him an enemy of his own class, is condemned,
when he loses heart, to forge at once values situated ABOVE all those values,
bourgeois or otherwise, conditioned by the order of real things.
   The inevitable character of this exhausting subterfuge is easy moreover to
display in broad terms. It is sufficient to recall in the first place that there had
not been, before Marx, any revolutionary movement free of idealism (in the
most vulgar sense of the word). At even a relatively recent date, the works of
Hugo manifested with great literary brilliance this infantile ethical tendency of
                   34 (O THE   **OLD   MOLE”    AND   THE   PREFIX   SUR


revolutionary unrest. While enjoying to the full his class privileges, the bour-
geois readily develops a transferred inferiority complex. His ‘‘guilt feelings’’
(resulting from a psychological impulse inherent to consciousness that risks
calling into question his personal right to trample down the unfortunate) are
skillfully shifted to the bourgeoisie in its entirety. Thus displaced, the guilty con-
science expresses itself with a disgusting idealistic verbal outpouring that gives
free rein to a craving for cheap utopian blindness. With few exceptions, this is
the pitiful psychology of bourgeois revolutionaries before the Marxist organiza-
tion of the class struggle. It leads to a representation of revolution as a redemp-
tive light rising above the world, above classes, the overflowing of spiritual ele-
vation and Lamartinian bliss.


                                           II

The necessities of political action eliminated these archaic deviations a long time
ago. But if one considers, apart from large economic upheavals, the psycho-
logical perturbations that accompany them (or, more exactly, are a consequence
of them), one must note the tenacity of developments consistent with the archaic
schema of prematerialist revolutions.
    But before turning to the description of moral deviations, we will find it use-
ful to refer to the general and essential contradiction of the high and the low,
under, for example, its political forms, namely, in the opposition between the
eagle and the ‘‘old mole.”

    From the point of view of appearance and brilliance, the eagle is obviously
the more virile conception of the two. Not only does it rise in radiant zones of
the solar sky, but it resides there with uncontested glamour. The eagle’s hooked
beak, which cuts all that enters into competition with it and cannot be cut, sug-
gests its sovereign virility. Thus the eagle has formed an alliance with the sun,
which castrates all that enters into conflict with it (Icarus, Prometheus, the
Mithraic bull). Politically the eagle is identified with imperialism, that is, with
the unconstrained development of individual authoritarian power, triumphant
over all obstacles. And metaphysically the eagle is identified with the idea,
when, young and aggressive, it has not yet reached a state of pure abstraction,
when it is still only the unbounded development of concrete fact disguised as
divine necessity.
    Revolutionary idealism tends to make of the revolution an eagle above eagles,
a supereagle striking down authoritarian imperialism, an idea as radiant as an
adolescent eloquently seizing power for the benefit of utopian enlightenment.
This detour naturally leads to the failure of the revolution and, with the help of
military fascism, the satisfaction of the elevated need for idealism. The Napo-
leonic epic represents its least ridiculous development: the castration of an Icar-
lan revolution, shameless imperialism exploiting the revolutionary urge.
                  THE   **OLD MOLE’’   AND   THE   PREFIX   SUR   L   35


    Meanwhile, brought back to the subterranean action of economic facts, the
‘“old-mole’’ revolution hollows out chambers in a decomposed soil repugnant
to the delicate nose of the utopians. ‘“Old mole,’’ Marx’s resounding expression
for the complete satisfaction of the revolutionary outburst of the masses,     must
be understood in relation to the notion of a geological uprising as expressed in
the Communist Manifesto. Marx’s point of departure has nothing to do with the
heavens, preferred station of the imperialist eagle as of Christian or revolution-
ary utopias. He begins in the bowels of the earth, as in the materialist bowels
of proletarians.

    We should not be surprised to see such a general human contradiction as that
between things low and things elevated represented here in the form of very par-
ticular psychological representations. It is true that philosophical usage excludes
inverted reductions of this sort. But for this reason, philosophical usages them-
selves are in question. That is to say that to substitute endlessly and mutually
reducible notions for the scandalous image of contingent nature making free
determinations would only express the hatred of philosophers for those blind
realities that are as insensitive to philosophical categories as rats gnawing books.
The philosophers who work with obstinate patience to emasculate the represen-
tation of the world evidently would prefer to believe that a certain liberty of
bearing, the provocative character of events, is superficial. Even in its most
general form, the opposition which runs from the Very-High to the Very-Low
has disappeared with the success of secular philosophy. At least it has ceased
to occupy any specific position among other problems, for human vocabulary
continues everywhere to maintain throughout a faithful memory of fundamental
categories.
    That this has been the fate of an essential problem, literally placed under a
bushel, while evidence of it necessarily leaps forth every time a moral judgment
is pronounced, is readily explained if we recognize that it was necessary at any
cost to endow antinomies in general with a mechanical and abstract character
(as with Kant or Hegel). It is true that it seems easy to characterize in this
manner the antinomy of high and low, but this antinomy, more than any other,
is thereby immediately deprived of interest and meaning. All of its interest and
meaning are linked to the irreconcilable nature of its specific forms: the terrify-
ing darkness of tombs or caves and the luminous splendor of heaven, the impur-
ity of earth where bodies rot and the purity of lofty space; on the order of the
individual the base and noble faculties, on the political order the imperialist
eagle and the ‘‘old-mole’’ revolution, as on the universal order matter, vile and
base reality, and elevated spirit. This language, unkown by philosophers (at least
explicity), is nonetheless a universal language for the human race.
    It is true that this language was provisionally rejected because of the mystical
forms to which it gave rise. But it has been taken up again in our own day pre-
cisely for its material character. Whenever one has recourse to images, most
                   36 O THE *‘OLD MOLE”       AND THE PREFIX SUR

often peremptory and provocative ones, borrowed from the most concrete of
contradictions, it is reality on the material order, human physiology, that comes
into play. A man is not so different from a plant, experiencing like a plant an
urge that raises him perpendicular to the ground. It will not be difficult to show
that human morality is linked to the urge to an erect posture that distinguishes
the human being from the anthropomorphic ape. But on the other hand, a plant
thrusts its obscene-looking roots into the earth in order to assimilate the putres-
cence of organic matter, and a man experiences, in contradiction to strict moral-
ity, urges that draw him to what 1s low, placing him in open antagonism to all
forms of spiritual elevation. Such urges have always been eloquently rebuked,
confused in their aggregate with the most immediately nefarious of specific pas-
sions: base and greedy for decomposition, they are no less the deep roots that
give such a staggering sense to words as little acknowledged and allowing as
little puerile hope to subsist as human heart.

     If one now considers social strata, universally divided into upper and lower,
it is impossible to deny that aspirations are produced within each class that head
in one direction as well as in the other. Nevertheless the upper classes make
almost exclusive use of ideas—i.e., the most elevated forms of human life—for
even when those ideas have a low origin they are no less elaborated in a high
place, in high intellectual spheres, before taking on universal value. On the other
hand, the movements of the human heart, introducing with historical upheavals
their immense disorder and their greedy vulgarity, are produced only within the
proletariat, in the submerged masses dedicated to measureless agitation (even
patriotic movements, directed and exploited by the dominant bourgeoisie, have
consistency only insofar as they are supported by the deep eddies provoked in
the lower social strata; meanwhile they are produced like the debauchery of
minors for the benefit of bourgeois elegance and spiritual elevation, just as these
authorize and organize capitalist exploitation).


                                        III
Returning now to the particular case of the moral abnormalities that result when
disheartened individuals betray their class, let us note first of all that hatred of
bourgeois spiritual elevation, of fair words and empty promises, appeared for
the first time with extraordinary acuteness and freshness in the writings of
Nietzsche. An entire philosophy, neglected only for pragmatic reasons, has as
its aim the establishing of values that would pem{it individuals to raise them-
selves above human class conditions. At the heart of Nietzsche’s demands lies
such flagrant disgust for the senile idealism of the establishment, such passionate
revolt—so spiteful toward the hypocrisy and the moral shabbiness that presides
over current world exploitation—that it is impossible to define his work as one
                  THE ‘‘OLD MOLE’’ AND THE PREFIX SUR O 37

of the ideological forms of the dominant class. Not that Nietzsche had anything
whatsoever in common with the working proletariat: he was far from perceiving
that there is only one solution to the difficulties that gave play to the violence
of his language, namely the renunciation of all moral values associated with
class superiority, the renunciation of all that deprives *‘distinguished’ men of the
virility of the proletarian. Nietzsche was condemned by circumstances to
imagine his break with conformist ideology as an Icarian adventure. The urge
that obliged him brutally to reject bourgeois tawdriness and conventional moral-
ity did not come from below, from the submerged upheaval of the human masses
(by definition, bourgeois individuals can feel nothing directly of all that is over-
whelming in those masses—an imperviousness to fact is undeniable); the only
hope for emancipation for an individual of the bourgeois class derives from
eventual action of an Icarian complex. It is impossible to betray one’s class
through friendship for the proletariat, but only through an inclination to seize
what one must call, in accordance with Nietzsche’s terminology, ‘‘fire from
heaven,’’: and this is to be accomplished by simple subversion, for the pleasure
of infringing supposedly intangible laws. But individuals only want to seize fire
from heaven in order to annihilate themselves, like mites in the presence of an
acetylene torch.
   In effect, what can there be in the will to rise above social conditions, if one
excludes the unconscious pathological desire to be struck down violently like
Icarus and Prometheus. Current economic conditions force the ruling classes to
rely upon undeniably less ethereal values than in the past. It is impossible to
renew today the substitutions wrought during the Middle Ages; whereas the
idealized Chivalry of the Holy Grail or an absurd knight errantry could buttress
an exploitative and cynically self-serving ‘‘chivalric’’ class, present-day capital-
ism has been unable to invent any sublimation for the condition of a banker or
captain of industry. The perfectly clear reason is that the category of the sub-
lime, maintained in the development of a strictly military imperialism (with, for
example, the eagle as moral emblem) has become useless to industrial and
commercial development in ordinary times. Above all it has become irreconcil-
able with the practice of capitalist exploitation, which requires level-headedness,
not foolish generosity, aptitude for mathematical speculation, nor the spirit of
adventure. In capitalism power itself is carried to the highest abstraction of an
idea (bank capital), and in order to exist, to attain selfhood, it suffices for the
individual to participate regularly in this power (the least sensuous that has ever
existed); however mundane its objective may be, this power constitutes a perfect
incarnation of this idea, i.e., what is most elevated and free of the intervention
of any values other than material utility. Under those conditions, what does the
rage to resort to the elevated and sublime, to protests against the impoverishment
of human nature, signify? À regression certainly.
    It would be boorish today to neglect the frequency of the first reactionary
                     38 O THE ‘‘OLD MOLE'’ AND THE PREFIX SUR

movements, romanticisms, boorish to deny the reactionary and romantic charac-
ter of Nietzschean morality. Doubtless it would be difficult to find in Nietzsche’s
work a shadow of the sentimental foolishness and the medieval awkwardness of
the sentimental romantics (the French romantics or Wagner, for example). But
it is Nietzsche’s very awareness of the risk resulting from an exaltation literally
unexpected—and lacking any object—that placed him in the classical rut of
claims for a morality of the masters. It is not the masters who need such a
morality: exploiters are not going to seek their values in unbalanced philosophy.
When their values are given to them immediately by the economic conditions
of exploitation, American bankers dispense with The Will to Power. Only'the
Nietzschean romantic exaltation required an improbably soaring of archaic
values (rigorously exposed, it is true, by a philologist) borrowed from the
dominant classes of primarily military epochs (Greek antiquity, the Italian
Renaissance). And those values, if one provisionally sets aside the elimination
of Christian elements and the introduction of moral cynicism, are reduced to the
chivalric values on which modern society rested until the progressive introduc-
tion of bourgeois capitalist values.
    But for a sick individual, isolated from his class and any social activity, what
could the result finally be of these value substitutions? It is evident that a man
like Nietzsche, wanting to assert the human splendor of people who really had
exercised domination—a splendor determined by social forms that had disap-
peared—could only become aware, in the first place, of his ineptitude for current
social   forms,   and,   in the last, of the excessively   derisive   and even   imbecilic
character of this mental activity—brilliant or not.
    Archaisms can be useful to conservatives. In the mind of a rebel, they repre-
sent no more than an Icarian illumination. Nietzsche was never attracted except
by thoroughly defunct values that had become impractical and scandalous:
values intended to ridicule prosaically—in their own eyes as well as in others—
the adherents of a doctrine that is only a shattering provocation. Obviously if
the man of genius admired by the mob is at bottom, as he admits, only a ludi-
crous and wretched creature, one has only to see things as they are: he only
carries a splendid and intellectual nightmare to the sublime the better to offer
his liver to the beak of simpletons and louts who lay down the law in contempo-
rary society. And so he becomes the torn and at the same time insulting victim
of unprecedented stupidity.
    We must insist on the fact that there is no other immediate outcome for inte-
rior agitation resulting from an individual’s inability to limit himself to the bour-
geois ideal. Nietzsche revealed this primordial fact: once God had been killed
by the bourgeoisie, the immediate result would be catastrophic confusion, empti-
ness, and even a sinister impoverishment. Therefore it was necessary not only
to create new values, but more precisely values able to fill the void left by God:
hence a series of antireligious and ethereal values.
                  THE '‘OLD MOLE’’ AND THE PREFIX SUR OJ 39

    Not that Nietzsche was altogether incapable of wallowing in the mud. Since
the beginning of reactions against bourgeois mental forms, the tendency to see
outmoded values as base has of necessity made way for itself, but only in the
background. Zarathustra’s ‘‘sense of the Earth’’ is a precise indication in that
respect. Nor should one forget that Nietzsche already spoke of the sexual basis
of higher psychic functions. He even went so far as to give greatest value from
the perspective of philosophical truth to outbursts of laughter (may any truth that
has not made you burst out laughing at least once be seen by you as false). It
is nonetheless true that the opposing tendency quickly gained the upper hand,
that laughter, brutal expression of the heart’s baseness, became along with truth
something elevated, weightless, Hellenic, etc.


                                          IV
The same double tendency is found in contemporary surrealism, which main-
tains, of course, the predominance of higher ethereal values (clearly expressed
by the addition of the prefix sur, the trap into which Nietzsche had already fallen
with superman). More precisely, since surrealism is immediately distinguishable
by the addition of low values (the unconscious, sexuality, filthy language, etc.),
it invests these values with an elevated character by associating them with the
most immaterial values.
    The resulting adulterations matter little to the surrealists: that the unconscious
is no more than a pitiable treasure-trove; that Sade, emasculated by his cowardly
apologists, takes on the form of a moralising idealist . . . All claims from
below have been scurrilously disguised as claims from above: and the surreal-
ists, having become the laughing-stock of those who have seen close up a sorry
and shabby failure, obstinately hold on to their magnificent Icarian pose.
     In December 1929, M. Breton did not hesitate to make himself ridiculous by
writing that ‘‘the simplest surrealist act consists of dashing down into the street,
pistol in hand, and firing blindly, as fast as you can pull the trigger, into the
crowd.’’ He adds: ‘‘Anyone who, at least once in his life, has not dreamed of
thus putting an end to the petty system of debasement and cretinization in effect
has a well-defined place in that crowd, with his belly at barrel level.’’! That such
an image should present itself so insistently to his view proves decisively the
importance in his pathology of castration reflexes: such an extreme provocation
seeks to draw immediate and brutal punishment. But the worst is not to be sub-
ject to reactions of this order (which no bourgeois rebel, it goes without saying,
could have avoided); the literary use to which they are put is much more signifi-
cant. Others instinctively know how blocked impulses are to be taken into ac-
count. The surrealists employ them in literature, in order to attain the displaced
and pathetic grandeur that ridicules and strips them of relevance. For when
bourgeois society refuses to take them seriously and to take up the challenge they
                  40 O) THE ‘’OLD MOLEF’’ AND THE PREFIX SUR

offer, satisfied to isolate them in an impotent harangue that transforms them little
by little into carnival puppets, the surrealists have found the destiny they were
seeking, such that they would accept no other at any price. For them it was never
a question of really terrifying: the intrinsic character of the bogeymen they play
is sufficient, for they are eager to play the role of juvenile victims, despicable
victims of a general incomprehension and degradation.
    The transformations of Icarian reflexes into a pathetic-comic and gratuitous
literature is doubtless surrealism’s most striking characteristic. (With the appar-
ent resolution to defend an increasingly mocking position, they have pushed an
ill-considered provocation so far as to raise a hue and cry against those who
would want speech to lead to action.) But interior moral activity, in all its forms,
differs in no wise from this conspicuous literary exploitation. It is all too evident
that the surrealists do not seek to achieve a contemptuous attitude through con-
sciousness of their own moral integrity. On the contrary, a few radical principles
serve only to enable them to feel their own life by contrast as a shabby joke,
for they know too well their own lethargy and inertia, all too many haggling
deals and petty compromises . . . But the Icarian movement consists precisely
of acting and even thinking as if they had attained without laughter the violent
spiritual elevation that is only the empty rumbling of their words. They heap un-
compromising accusations upon dissident surrealists and experience at the same
time the highest degree of bitter pleasure, because they feel obscurely, whatever
their verbal arrogance, that their own fall is no less profound, nor even less
apparent: how can they hide from themselves at bottom that certain of their
accusations provoke only outbursts of laughter (or else imbecilic pity)?

    Nevertheless one must pity those persons on whom a reading of the Second
Surrealist Manifesto makes no strong impression—I say this without the least
irony. Coming abruptly, after several prefaces of which the least one can say
is that they betray a profound poverty of spirit, the Second Manifesto is without
any doubt the most consequential work, the most consistent declaration, that the
surrealists have attempted for a long time. Even its most radical implications
have not yet been revealed, and perhaps it is useful that they are here, in the
‘‘remarkable garbage pail known,’’ if one believes M. Breton, as Bifur . . . ?
    One could not repeat too much how childish it is to deny the inevitable spiri-
tual upheavals and unrest that the surrealists have thought themselves able to
express. This is why it is important to point out sharply the detour which the
Second Manifesto resolutely executes with a dedication that rises to astonishing
solemnity.
    One can be grateful to M. Breton for several indications which recall the pro-
found impulses that set things in motion at the beginnings of the surrealist move-
ment. And we are not especially concerned here with what touches upon reli-
gion, family, or country: these, as it turns out, do not depend on the wrath of
                  THE   ‘‘OLD MOLE’’   AND   THE   PREFIX   SUR   U 41


the surrealists to appear to us sticky with spittle. But without showing any re-
spect for literary antiques, we can recognize that the ‘‘unhealthy’’ character of
several works by Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Huysmans, and Lautréamont still re-
mains the most that can be accomplished in this domain. Everything leads us to
believe that surrealism still shares their obsession with unhealthiness, which is
to say just how impossible it is at the present moment for anything human to
arise, except in the cesspool of the heart; nonetheless it is regrettable that these
unhealthy forms are limited to the poetic, and that, for M. Breton, to pass from
brilliant shadow play to the failed acts that today underlie human existence, is
to ‘‘hold any rung whatever of this degraded ladder . . . ””
    It is regrettable, we say, that nothing can enter into M. Breton’s confused
head except in poetic form. All of existence, conceived as purely literary by M.
Breton, diverts him from the shabby, sinister, or inspired events occurring all
around him, from what constitutes the real decomposition of an immense world.
Given the wrongs of the times, the confused and inert stupefaction of a collective
bourgeois existence dedicated to nothing less than the mustiness of the balance
sheet, the surrealists find no meaning in an ignoble rout save a pretext for tragic,
headlong flight. Since ‘‘all that does not aim at the annihilation of being in an
interior and blind radiance’’“ is vulgar in his eyes, M. Breton seeks only, in
sluggish confusion, raising on occasion some sad shreds of grandiloquence, to
provoke a panic capable of justifying his willful aberrations. Unfortunately,
even M. Breton has not managed so far to be frightened by his own phrase-
ology . . .
    Servile idealism rests precisely in this will to poetic agitation rather than in
a strictly juvenile dialectic: a completely unhappy desire to turn to upper spiri-
tual regions, a hatred of vulgarity, the base vulgarity that decomposes every-
thing in a flash—leaving the pearls of wisdom to the mercy of the first swine.
A peevish aristocracy, mental askesis—with such necessities, both puritanical
and conventional, hypocrisy without the excuse of practical value begins. Where
in it is the untrammeled frenzy of the heart, of a heart greedy for each contradic-
tion crudely granted to solemn destiny, to each thing’s duty to be—greedy, one
must say with aggressive shame, to see its most touching and angelic flights of
fancy sullied? . . . All this unhealthiness, vulgar or not, outside of which there
1s no life, but only the elements that provoke it (just as in the same street there
is no love, but only beings brought together in their common greed by so little),
this unhealthiness is perhaps no more than a literary last resort. For ‘‘everything
tends to make us believe that there exists a certain point of the mind at which
life and death, the real and the imagined, past and future, the communicable and
the incommunicable, high and low, cease to be perceived as contradictions. One
would search in vain for any motivation behind surrealist activity other than this
point . . . ’’S Nothing less is called for than the annihilation of healthy contin-
gencies as well as the unhealthy contingencies of nature. But this enterprise,
                  42 [J THE ‘‘OLD MOLE’' AND THE PREFIX SUR

however surprising it may appear coming from a man who does not usually
aspire to childishness (who would even appear, if one were to judge from several
citations, not to be unaware of Hegel’s Logic), this enterprise does not aim so
much as one might think at the empty abstraction envisaged by Hegel, but
rather, more exactly, at what M. Breton, with professional ease, himself calls
‘“an interior and blind radiance . . . no more the soul of ice than of fire.”’
Heaven’s vault, still the Icarian illumination and the same flight toward the
heavens from which it seems it will be easy to curse this base world (but from
which we know above all with what derisive ease a man is cast)—it is into the
brilliant immensity of the sky, not into the void of Hegelian being-nothingness,
that M. Breton is constantly thrown by verbal momentum. M. Breton deludes
himself, he abuses his mob like a priest when he undertakes to resolve
contradictions so slippery for him as elevated and base. What need he has to
make us believe that his preferred states are situated outside of everything, when
every sentence he writes situates them above, when he is reduced to speak of
nothing but ‘‘brief beauty concealed and of the long and accessible beauty that
can be revealed.’’® From one who speaks across the heavens, full of aggressive
respect for heaven and its lightning bolts, full of disgust for this too base world
that he believes he scorns—scorns more than anyone has ever scorned it before
him—after touching Icarian naiveté has betrayed his desire for the miraculous,
we can only expect the sad but impotent will to provoke panic and the betrayal
of the vulgar interests of the collectivity, which have become simply filth, a
pretext to rise with cries of disgust.
    Do not be shocked by the significance I place on the interpretation of an
image (fundamental moreover in the Second Manifesto) as an equivalent of the
Icarian celestial vault. An analysis of M. Breton’s behavior permits us, more-
over, to specify the sense of this psychological entity, to note in a general way
the role of the sun in human impulses. Even though the blinding celestial vault,
when it becomes a psychological obsession, implies spiritual elevation, this
spiritual elevation fails to take on the value of steadfastness or conservation. In
this case spiritual elevation is almost entirely determined by the conscious or
unconscious desire for one of the basest forms of agitation, but this desire cannot
be satisfied except by an elevation increasingly stripped of sense and purely
aggressive, consequently tied to the most derisive, the most inane contempt for
vulgar human nature. Placed in these conditions, a man comes to regard habitual
vulgarity as a sign of guilt and punishment, for he is obliged to render himself
guilty of extraordinary excesses in the most turbulent kind of exaltation, in order
to regain this vulgarity, which has become for him a vertiginous consciousness
of his fall. But when such a man begins to speak, he can arrange sentences in
his mind only to condemn the entire earth, the base earth, domain of pure abjec-
tion. He even associates the image of the impending fall with this terrifying
                  THE ‘‘OLD MOLE’’ AND THE PREFIX SUR L 43

curse on the earth: ‘‘Let him,’’ we read at the end of the Second Manifesto, ‘‘in
spite of any restrictions, use the avenging arm of the idea against the bestiality
of all beings and all things, and let him one day, vanquished—but vanquished
only if the world is world—welcome the discharge of his sad rifles like a salvo
fired in salute.’’’

    In the conditions that have just been specified, it is evident at the very least
that the implications of surrealism can be pursued only as negation (the provi-
sional use of the Hegelian term is of little significance here). Only the rupture
that eliminates the slightest concern for recognition, the slightest respect for
persons (not even true contempt, hardly crass derision), allows this moral infan-
tilism to pass to free subversion, the basest subversion. The passage from Hegel-
ian philosophy to materialism (as from utopian or Icarian socialism to scientific
socialism) makes explicit the necessary character of such a rupture. The forms
of mental activity (in its most interior manifestations) do not have a development
perceptibly different from the development of intellectual determinations con-
cerning economic and social existence.
    The earth is base, the world is world, human agitation is only vulgar and per-
haps not acknowledgeable: this is the shame of Icarian despair. But to the loss
of the head there is no other reply: a crass sneer, vile grimaces. For it is human
agitation, with all the vulgarity of needs small and great, with its flagrant disgust
for the police who repress it, it is the agitation of all men (except for this police
and the friends of the police), that alone determines revolutionary mental forms,
in opposition to bourgeois mental forms. In human terms no baseness values,
at present, the rage of refined literati, lovers of an accursed poetry; what cannot
move the heart of a ditchdigger already has the existence of shadows. There
remains, it is true, the almost artificial lighting, which serves to display the
ruins. And down with denigrators of an immediate ‘‘human interest,”” down
with all the scribblers with their spiritual elevation and their sanctified disgust
for material needs!
    For those bourgeois who still exercise a certain mastery of their old intellec-
tual domain, there is no possibility of instituting a culture, or even, more gener-
ally, purely proletarian principles of mental action. But there is no possibility
for any class until bourgeois principles have become altogether and for everyone
principles of derision and general disgust—including Icarian subterfuge, even if
this subterfuge will be regarded someday as a kind of dawn of mental liberation,
just as bourgeois revolutions represent the dawn of proletarian revolution. By
excavating the fetid ditch of bourgeois culture, perhaps we will see open up in
the depths of the earth immense and even sinister caves where force and human
liberty will establish themselves, sheltered from the call to order of a heaven that
today demands the most imbecilic elevation of any man’s spirit.
                          44 [) THE ‘‘OLD MOLE”’ AND THE PREFIX SUR


                                                   Notes

     1. [The Second Surrealist Manifesto,         in André Breton, Manifestoes of Surrealism, trans.
R. Seaver and H. R. Lane (Ann Arbor:          The University of Michigan   Press,   1969), p. 125. Tr.]
     2. [Ibid, p. 166. Tr.]
          . [Ibid, p. 125. Tr.]
           . [Ibid, p. 124. Translation modified. Tr.]



    NNB
          . [Ibid, p. 123. Translation modified. Tr.]
          . [Ibid, p. 187. Tr.]
          . [Ibid, p. 187. Tr.)
Base Materialism                     and       Gnosticism




If one thinks of a particular object, it is easy to distinguish matter from form,
and an analogous distinction can be made with regard to organic beings, with
form taking on the value of the unity of being and of its individual existence.
But if things as a whole are taken into account, transposed distinctions of this
kind become arbitrary and even unintelligible. Two verbal entities are thus
formed, explicable only through their constructive value in the social order: an
abstract God (or simply the idea), and abstract matter; the chief guard and the
prison walls. The variants of this metaphysical scaffolding are of no more inter-
est than are the different styles of architecture. People become excited trying to
know if the prison came from the guard or if the guard came from the prison;
even though this agitation has had a primordial historical importance, today it
risks provoking a delayed astonishment, if only because of the disproportion
between the consequences of the debate and its radical insignificance.
    It is nevertheless very remarkable that the only kind of materialism that up
to now in its development has escaped systematic abstraction, namely dialectical
materialism, had as its starting point, at least as much as ontological material-
ism, absolute idealism in its Hegelian form. (There is no need to go back on this
method: materialism, whatever its scope in the positive order, necessarily is
above all the obstinate negation of idealism, which amounts to saying, finally,
of the very basis of all philosophy.) Now Hegelianism, no less than the classical
philosophy of Hegel’s period, apparently proceeded from very ancient meta-
physical conceptions, conceptions developed by, among others, the Gnostics, in

                                        45
                   46 [J BASE MATERIALISM     AND GNOSTICISM

an epoch when metaphysics could still be associated with the most monstrous
dualistic and therefore strangely abased cosmogonies.'
    I admit that I have, in respect to mystical philosophies, only an unambiguous
interest, analogous in practice to that of an uninfatuated psychiatrist toward his
patients; it seems to me rather pointless to put one’s trust in tendencies that,
without meeting resistance, lead to the most pitiful dishonesty and bankruptcy.
But it is difficult today to remain indifferent even to partly falsified solutions
brought, at the beginning of the Christian era, to problems that do not appear
noticeably different from our own (which are those of a society whose original
principles have become, in a very precise sense, the dead letter of a society that
must put itself in question and overturn itself in order to rediscover motives of
force and violent agitation). Thus the adoration of an ass-headed god (the ass
being the most hideously comic animal, and at the same time the most humanly
virile) seems to me capable of taking on even today a crucial value: the severed
ass’s head of the acephalic personification of the sun undoubtedly represents,
even if imperfectly, one of materialism’s most virulent manifestations.

    I will leave it to Henry-Charles Puech to explain here, in future articles,? the
development of such myths, so suspect in this period, hideous as chancres and
carrying the germs of a bizarre but mortal subversion of the ideal and of the
order expressed today by the words ‘‘classical antiquity.”’ Yet I think it would
be neither vain nor impossible to simplify things extremely, first of all, and
indicate the meaning that must be given to the mythological and philosophical
disorders which at that time affected the representation of the world. Gnosticism,
in fact, before and after the preachings of Christianity, and in an almost bestial
way, no matter what were its metaphysical developments, introduced a most
impure fermentation into Greco-Roman ideology, borrowed from everywhere,
from the Egyptian tradition, from Persian dualism, from Eastern Jewish hetero-
doxy, elements that conformed the least to the established intellectual order; it
added its own dreams, heedlessly expressing a few monstrous obsessions; it was
not revolted, in its religious practices, by the basest (and thus most upsetting)
forms of Greek or Chaldeo-Assyrian magic and astrology; and at the same time
it utilized, but perhaps more exactly it compromised, newborn Christian theol-
ogy and Hellenistic metaphysics.
     It is not surprising that the protean character of this agitation has given rise
to contradictory interpretations. It has even been possible to represent Gnostic-
ism as a strongly Hellenized intellectual form of a primitive Christianity too
popular and indifferent to metaphysical developments, a kind of superior Chris-
tianity elaborated by philosophers who had broken with Hellenistic speculation,
and rejected by the uncultivated Christian masses.? Thus the principal protagon-
ists of Gnosticism—Basilides, Valentinus, Bardesanes, Marcion—appeared to be
                   BASE MATERIALISM     AND GNOSTICISM     [J 47

great religious humanists and, from the point of view of traditional Protes-
tantism, great Christians. Their bad name, the more or less suspect character
of their theories, were supposedly explained by the fact that they were only
known through the polemics of the church fathers, their violent enemies and
obligatory slanderers.
    The writings of the Gnostic theologians were systematically destroyed by the
orthodox Christians (with few exceptions, nothing remains today of a consider-
able literature). Only the stones on which they engraved the figures of a provoc-
ative and especially indecent Pantheon permit one to comment at length on
something other than diatribes: but they precisely confirm the bad opinion of the
heresiologists. The most consistent modern exegesis admits, moreover, that the
abstract forms of Gnostic entities evolved out of very crude myths, which corre-
spond to the crudity of the images represented on the stones. It establishes
above all that Neoplatonism or Christianity must not be sought as the origin of
Gnosticism, whose real foundation is Zoroastrian dualism.“ À sometimes dis-
figured dualism, doubtless following Christian or philosophical influences, but
a profound dualism and, at least in its specific development, not emasculated by
an adaptation to social necessities, as in the case of the Iranian religion (on this
subject, it is essential to observe that Gnosticism, and to the same degree
Manicheanism, which in a way derived from it, never served any social organi-
zations, never assumed the role of State religion).
    In practice, it is possible to see as a leitmotiv of Gnosticism the conception
of matter as an active principle having its own eternal autonomous existence as
darkness (which would not be simply the absence of light, but the monstrous
archontes revealed by this absence), and as evil (which would not be the absence
of good, but a creative action). This conception was perfectly incompatible with
the very principle of the profoundly monistic Hellenistic spirit, whose dominant
tendency saw matter and evil as degradations of superior principles. Attributing
the creation of the earth, where our repugnant and derisory agitation takes place,
to a horrible and perfectly illegitimate principle evidently implies, from the point
of view of the Greek intellectual construction, a nauseating, inadmissible pes-
simism, the exact opposite of what had to be established at all costs and made
universally manifest. In fact the opposed existence of an excellent divinity,
worthy of the absolute confidence of the human spirit, matters little if the baneful
and odious divinity of this dualism is under no circumstances reducible to it,
without any possibility of hope. It is true that even within Gnosticism things
were not always so clear-cut. The fairly widespread doctrine of emanation
(according to which the ignoble creator god, in other words the cursed god—
sometimes associated with Jehovah of the Bible—emanated from the Supreme
God) responded to a need for a palliative. But if we confine ourselves to the
specific meaning of Gnosticism, indicated both by heresiological controversies
                     48 □ BASE MATERIALISM AND GNOSTICISM




         Figure 5. Archontes with duck heads. Cabinet des Médailles, 2108 B. Phot.
         Bibl. nat. Paris. This stone bears on its reverse the inscription ABAATANAABA
         (a variant of abracadabra).


and by carvings on stones, the despotic and bestial obsession with outlawed and
evil forces seems irrefutable, as much in its metaphysical speculation as in its
mythological nightmare.
   It is difficult to believe that on the whole Gnosticism does not manifest above
all a sinister love of darkness, a monstrous taste for obscene and lawless
archontes, for the head of the solar ass (whose comic and desperate braying
would be the signal for a shameless revolt against idealism in power). The exis­
tence of a sect of licentious Gnostics and of certain sexual rites fulfills this ob­
scure demand for a baseness that would not be reducible, which would be owed
the most indecent respect: black magic has continued this tradition to the present
day.
   It is true that the supreme object of the spiritual activity of the Manicheans,
as of the Gnostics, was constantly the good and perfection: that was the way in
which their conceptions in themselves had a pessimistic meaning. But it is more
or less useless to take these appearances into account, and only the-troubled con­
cession to evil can in the end determine the meaning of these aspirations. If today
we overtly abandon the idealistic point of view, as the Gnostics and Manicheans
implicitly abandoned it, the attitude of those who see in their own lives an effect
of the creative action of evil appears even radically optimistic. It is possible in
                     BASE MATERIALISM AND GNOSTICISM □ 49




         Figure 6. Panmorphic Iao (?). Cabinet des Médailles. Phot. Bibl. nat. Paris.
         Agate. This representation, composed o f a group o f imaginary animals sur­
         rounded by seven planets, most likely represents the first o f the seven planetary
         archontes: Iao, the cursed god, generally identified with the god o f Genesis.


all freedom to be a plaything of evil if evil itself does not have to answer before
God. Having had recourse to archontes, it does not appear that one has deeply
desired the submission of things that belong to a higher authority, to an authority
the archontes stun with an eternal bestiality.

   Thus it appears—all things considered—that Gnosticism, in its psychological
process, is not so different from present-day materialism, I mean a materialism
not implying an ontology, not implying that matter is the thing-in-itself. For it
                     50 □ BASE MATERIALISM AND GNOSTICISM




         Figure 7. Acephalic god beneath two animal heads. Cabinet des Médailles,
         2170. Phot. Bibl. nat. Paris. Lapis-lazuli. At the foot o f the god, in a circle
         formed by a serpent biting its tail, Anubis, a woman, and a dog; below, a mum­
         my. The acephalic god can be identified with the Egyptian god Bes.


is a question above all of not submitting oneself, and with oneself one’s reason,
to whatever is more elevated, to whatever can give a borrowed authority to the
being that I am, and to the reason that arms this being. This being and its reason
can in fact only submit to what is lower, to what can never serve in any case
to ape a given authority. Also I submit entirely to what must be called matter,
since that exists outside of myself and the idea, and I do not admit that my reason
                     BASE MATERIALISM AND GNOSTICISM □ 51




         Figure 8. God with the legs of a mart, the body o f a serpent, and the head of
         a cock. Cabinet des Médailles M. 8003. Phot. Bibl. nat. Paris. Red jasper.

becomes the limit of what I have said, for if I proceeded in that way matter
limited by my reason would soon take on the value of a superior principle (which
this servile reason would be only too happy to establish above itself, in order
to speak like an authorized functionary). Base matter is external and foreign to
ideal human aspirations, and it refuses to allow itself to be reduced to the great
ontological machines resulting from these aspirations. But the psychological
process brought to light by Gnosticism had the same impact: it was a question
of disconcerting the human spirit and idealism before something base, to the ex­
tent that one recognized the helplessness of superior principles.
    The interest of this juxtaposition is augmented by the fact that the specific re­
actions of Gnosticism led to the representation of forms radically contrary to the
ancient academic style, to the representation of forms in which it is possible to
see the image of this base matter that alone, by its incongruity and by an over­
whelming lack of respect, permits the intellect to escape from the constraints of
idealism. In the same way today certain plastic representations are the expres­
sion of an intransigent materialism, of a recourse to everything that compro­
mises the powers that be in matters of form, ridiculing the traditional entities,
naively rivaling stupefying scarecrows. This is no less important than general
                        52 U    BASE   MATERIALISM        AND    GNOSTICISM


analytic interpretation, in the sense that only forms specific and meaningful to
the same degree as language can give concrete and immediately perceptible
expression to the psychological developments determined through analysis.

    EXPLANATION OF THE ILLUSTRATIONS.—The stones published in this article
are known      by the traditional       name    of gnostic      stones,   or Basilidian     stones,   or
Abraxas: their identification and nomenclature have as origin the name Abraxas,
which is found in the legends and in the philosophy of the Gnostic philosopher
Basilides. It is necessary however to indicate that this collection of stones, whose
common character allows them to be grouped under the name of the Gnostics,
does not necessarily come from Gnostic sects. Their origin could also be found
in the practices of Greek or Egyptian magic. The majority of them are Gnostic,
without it being possible to be more precise about each one of them. They pre-
sent in any case the worst difficulties of interpretation because of the syncretism
of their religious representations on the one hand and the frequent unintelligibil-
ity of their legends on the other.
    The date is impossible to specify, but most of them belong to the third and
fourth centuries. The origin is generally Eastern. Egypt in particular seems to
have been an important center of production. Egyptian divinities or figures in
an Egyptian style are frequently found on these stones. Thus the acephalic god
and Anubis represented in Figure 7.

                                                 Notes

       1. Since the Hegelian doctrine is above all an extraordinary and very perfect system of reduc-
tion, it ts evident that it is only in a reduced and emasculated state that one finds there the base ele-
ments that are essential in Gnosticism.
     However, in Hegel the role of these elements in thought remains one of destruction, just as de-
struction is given as necessary for the constitution of thought. This is why, when dialectical material-
ism was substituted for Hegelian idealism (through a complete overthrow of values, giving matter
the role that thought had had). matter was no longer an abstraction but a source of contradiction;
moreover, it was no longer a question of the providential character of contradiction, which became
simply one of the properties of the development of material facts.
      2. [See H.-C. Puech’s **Le Dieu Besa et la magie hellénistique’’ in Documents 7 (1930), pp.
415-25. Tr.]
     3. This interpretation has been developed      in France by Eugène     de Faye (cf. Introduction à
l’étude du gnosticisme, Paris, 1903, taken from Revue de l'histoire des religions, vols. 45 and 46,
and Gnostiques et gnosticisme, Etude critique des documents du gnosticisme chrétien aux IF et IF
siecles, Paris, 1913, in Bibliorhèque de !'Ecole des Hautes Etudes, Sciences religieuses, vol. 27).
      4. Wilheim Bousset, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis, Gôttingen, 1907.
      5. Ibid, chapter 3, Der Dualismus der Gnosis.
The       Deviations                   of Nature




   Among all things that can be contemplated under the concavity of the
   heavens, nothing 1s seen that arouses the human spirit more, that rav-
   ishes the sense more,       that horrifies more,    that provokes     more   terror or
   admiration to a greater extent among creatures than the monsters,
   prodigies, and abominations through which we see the works of nature
   inverted,   mutilated, and truncated.

This remark by Pierre Boaistuau can be found at the beginning of his Histoires
prodigieuses, a work published in 1561,' in other words during a period of
public calamities. Prodigies and monsters were regarded in the past as presages
and, most often, as such, as birds of ill omen.        Boaistuau had the merit of devot-
ing his book to monsters without worrying about augury, and of recognizing to
what extent men are eager for stupefaction.
    The pleasure of going to see the ‘‘freaks’’ 1s today seen as a carnival pleasure,
and characterizes the one who comes forward as a gawker. In the sixteenth cen-
tury a kind of religious curiosity, due in part to the habit of living at the mercy
of the most terrible scourges, was still mixed with curious silliness. Books
devoted to Siamese twins and to two-headed calves were very common, and
their authors did not hesitate to affect an elevated tone. In the eighteenth century
the interest in monsters could be attributed to an alleged scientific curiosity. The
luxurious album of engraved and colored illustrations by Regnault, which was
first published   in   1775   (and   one of whose     illustrations   is reproduced   here),?
bears witness to a fairly superficial concern for information. It attests above all

                                            53
                                54 □ THE DEVIATIONS OF NATURE

                                                                                                                / / ’V




                                          .f)oul>/c ÂÜJn/ttnts
                                  7’trr </tt I «Vw< / ./< J t! Pttt'on. CAtrmytrn ./ /Ktn.r.
 ( ,V tfanr En/à/ts rswii.» .font vsnus a tert/uto tU ff i n t aMtcrano par too Aottftnca e t par Aa 7V/ro
 t'iumhf on Jr noft Jan.r Jo Jy/u/eflr /?.“2o./e.r Jtua Teh's reunnvnr%              /w'twnf' fit Um Jen/ / t’sifyo, Jru.r
 (h't-i//r,rt t It>< Jètt/e Latu/uo Jarur At flout As. w i CkfApAtfçe. une fraeAee artete, Ceo Jeu* par*.
■ties JÖ J/rtsent on Jer/.r Arone/tes f Aaetme. pour eununn/ufuer at/.r Jrt/.r AsAxtnnos of nn.v Jetnr
 Aoflrttuy        /a rotation Je.r Joua Cranes o/fte on ntt/tou .A t/to n / une/t'-nA- çttt a ÿtu/yt/e o
 ro//<'fn/>Amoo <r t><< At pas/te ,/otu/u/o June Armmr . tAr .l'ont Atfort:? on /!</{/.>as/t-S ,


       Figure 9. Régnault, The Deviations o f Nature, 1775: “ Double Child.” Illustra­
       tion o f a wax figure in the Cabinet Pinson, today in the Museum o f Natural
       History. Phot. Bibl. nat. Paris.
                         THE    DEVIATIONS   OF NATURE     O   55


to the fact that, in one way or another, in one period or another, mankind cannot
remain indifferent to its monsters.

    I will not review here the system of anatomical classification, reprinted in all
the dictionaries, from the treatises on teratology by Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire or
Guinard. It is of little importance, in fact, that the biologists have ended up clas-
sifying monsters in the same way as they do species. They remain, no less posi-
tively, anomalies and contradictions.
    A ‘‘freak’’ in any given fair provokes a positive impression of aggressive
incongruity, a little comic, but much more a source of malaise. This malaise 1s,
in an obscure way, tied to a profound seductiveness. And, if one can speak of
a dialectic of forms, it is evident that it is essential to take into account deviations
for which nature—even if they are most often determined to be against nature—
is incontestably responsible.
    On a practical level this impression of incongruity 1s elementary and constant:
it 1s possible to state that it manifests itself to a certain degree in the presence
of any given human individual. But it 1s barely perceptible. That is why 1t is
preferable to refer to monsters in order to determine it.
    However, the common character of personal incongruity and the monster can
be expressed with precision. The composite images that Galton achieved
through successive exposures of analogous but different faces, on the same piece
of photographic film, are well known. From the faces of four hundred male
American students, one obtains the typical face of the American student. Georg
Treu has defined in Durschnittbild und Schonheit (The Composite Image of
Beauty, in Zeitschrift für Aesthetik und Allgemeine Kunstwissenschaft, 1914, 1X,
3) the relation between the composite image and its components by showing that
the first was necessarily more beautiful than an average example of the others;
thus twenty mediocre faces constitute a beautiful face, and one obtains without
difficulty faces whose proportions are very nearly those of the Hermes of
Praxiteles. The composite image would thus give a kind of reality to the neces-
sarily beautiful Platonic idea. At the same time, beauty would be at the mercy
of a definition as classical as that of the common measure. But each individ-
ual   form   escapes   this    common   measure   and    is,   to   a   certain   degree,   a
monster.
    It is useful to observe here that the constitution of the perfect type with the
aid of composite photography is not very mysterious. In fact, if one photographs
a large number of similarly sized but differently shaped pebbles, it is impossible
to obtain anything other than a sphere: in other words, a geometric figure. It
is enough to note that a common measure necessarily approaches the regularity
of geometric figures.
    Monsters thus would be the dialectical opposites of geometric regularity, in
the same manner as individual forms, but in an irreducible way. ‘‘Among all
                            56 O THE DEVIATIONS OF NATURE

things that can be contemplated under the concavity of the heavens,                     nothing is
seen that arouses the human spirit more .         p
    The expression of the philosophical dialectic through forms, such as the
maker of the film Battleship Potemkin, S. M. Eisenstein, intends to carry out
in his next film (as he indicated in a lecture given at the Sorbonne on January
17), may take on the value of a revelation, and determine the most elementary,
and thus consequential, human relations. Without broaching here the question
of the metaphysical foundations of any given dialectic, one can affirm that the
determination of a dialectical development of facts as concrete as visible forms
would be literally overwhelming: ‘“Nothing is seen that arouses the human spirit
more,   that ravishes the senses more,          that horrifies more,       that provokes terror
to a greater extent among creatures .                  ?

                                       Notes

     1. Pierre Boaistuau, called Launay, born in Nantes, died in Paris in 1566. His Histoires prodi-
gieuses (first edition: Paris, 1561, in-8) was reprinted many times.
     2. Les Ecarts de la nature ou Recueil des principales monstruosités que la nature produit dans
le monde animal, painted after nature and published by Sr. and De Regnault, Paris, 1775, in-fol.,
40 engraved plates.
Rotten         Sun




The sun, from the human point of view (in other words, as it is confused with
the notion of noon) is the most elevated conception. It is also the most abstract
object, since it is impossible to look at it fixedly at that time of day. If we de-
scribe the notion of the sun in the mind of one whose weak eyes compel him
to emasculate it, that sun must be said to have the poetic meaning of mathemat-
ical serenity and spiritual elevation. If on the other hand one obstinately focuses
on it, a certain madness is implied, and the notion changes meaning because it
is no longer production that appears in light, but refuse or combustion, ade-
quately expressed by the horror emanating from a brilliant arc lamp. In practice
the scrutinized sun can be identified with a mental ejaculation, foam on the lips,
and an epileptic crisis. In the same way that the preceding sun (the one not
looked at) is perfectly beautiful, the one that is scrutinized can be considered
horribly ugly. In mythology, the scrutinized sun is identified with a man who
slays a bull (Mithra), with a vulture that eats the liver (Prometheus): in other
words, with the man who looks along with the slain bull or the eaten liver. The
Mithraic cult of the sun led to a very widespread religious practice: people
stripped in a kind of pit that was covered with a wooden scaffold, on which a
priest slashed the throat of a bull; thus they were suddenly doused with hot
blood, to the accompaniment of the bull’s boisterous struggle and bellowing—a
simple way of reaping the moral benefits of the blinding sun. Of course the bull
himself is also an image of the sun, but only with his throat slit. The same goes
tor the cock, whose horrible and particularly solar cry always approximates the
screams of a slaughter. One might add that the sun has also been mythologically

                                        57
                                    58 [) ROTTEN   SUN

expressed by a man slashing his own throat, as well as by an anthropomorphic
being deprived of a head. All this leads one to say that the summit of elevation
is in practice confused with a sudden fall of unheard-of violence. The myth of
Icarus is particularly expressive from this point of view: it clearly splits the sun
in two—the one that was shining at the moment of Icarus’s elevation, and the
one that melted the wax, causing failure and a screaming fall when Icarus got
too close.
    This human tendency to distinguish two suns owes its particular importance
in this case to the fact that the psychological movements described are not ones
that have been diverted, nor their urges attenuated, by secondary elements. But
this also indicates that it would be ridiculous a priori to try to determine the pre-
cise equivalents of such movements in an activity as complex as painting. It
is nevertheless possible to say that academic painting more or less corresponded
to an elevation  — without excess  — of the spirit. In contemporary painting, how-
ever,   the search for that which    most   ruptures the highest elevation,   and for a
blinding brilliance, has a share in the elaboration or decomposition of forms,
though strictly speaking this is only noticeable in the paintings of Picasso.
Mouth




The mouth is the beginning or, if one prefers, the prow of animals; in the most
characteristic cases, it is the most living part, in other words, the most terrifying
for neighboring animals. But man does not have a simple architecture like
beasts, and it is not even possible to say where he begins. He possibly starts at
the top of the skull, but the top of the skull is an insignificant part, incapable
of catching one’s attention; it is the eyes or the forehead that play the meaningful
role of an animal’s jaws.
    Among civilized men, the mouth has even lost the relatively prominent char-
acter that it still has among primitive men. However, the violent meaning of the
mouth is conserved in a latent state; it suddenly regains the upper hand with a
literally cannibalistic expression such as mouth of fire [bouche a feu], applied
to the cannons men use to kill each other. And on important occasions human
life is still bestially concentrated in the mouth: rage makes men grind their teeth,
while terror and atrocious suffering turn the mouth into the organ of rending
screams. On this subject it is easy to observe that the overwhelmed individual
throws back his head while frenetically stretching his neck in such a way that
the mouth becomes,    as much as possible, an extension of the spinal column,      in
other words, in the position it normally occupies in the constitution of animals.
As if explosive impulses were to spurt directly out of the body through the
mouth, in the form of screams. This fact highlights both the importance of the
mouth in animal physiology or even psychology, and the general importance of
the superior or anterior extremity of the body, the orifice of profound physical

                                          59
                                    60 L] MOUTH

impulses; one sees at the same time that a man can liberate these impulses in
at least two different ways, in the brain or in the mouth, but that as soon as these
impulses become violent, he is obliged to resort to the bestial way of liberating
them. Whence the narrow constipation of a strictly human attitude, the magis-
terial look of the face with   a closed mouth,    as beautiful   as a safe.
Sacrificial Mutilation
and the Severed Ear
of Vincent Van Gogh




The Annales medico-psychologiques' presents the following facts on the subject
of ‘‘Gaston F . . . , age 30, embroidery designer, admitted to the Saint-Anne
Hospital on January 25, 1924 . . . ”
      On the morning of December 11, he was walking on the Boulevard
   de Ménilmontant, and having arrived at the Pere-Lachaise cemetery,
   he stared at the sun, and, receiving from its rays the imperative order
   to tear off his finger, without hesitation, without feeling any pain, he
   seized between his teeth his left index finger, successively broke
   through the skin, the flexor and extensor tendons, and the articular
   ligaments at the level of the phalangeal articulation; using his right
   hand, he then twisted the extremity of the dilacerated left index finger,
   severing it completely. He tried to flee from several policemen, who
   nevertheless succeeded in overpowering him, and took him to the
   hospital . . .

   The young automutilator, beyond working as an embroidery designer, was
a painter in his spare time. There are few details concerning the tendencies re-
vealed in his painting, but we know that he had read the art criticism of Mirbeau.
His anxieties also led him to such subjects as Hindu mysticism and the philos-
ophy of Friedrich Nietzsche.

      In the days that preceded the automutilation, he drank several
   glasses of rum or cognac. He still suspects that he was influenced by
   the biography of Van Gogh, in which he had read that the painter,

                                        61
                            62 [J SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION

   during a spell of madness, had cut off his ear and sent it to a girl in a
   house of prostitution.    It was then that, walking along the Boulevard              de
   Ménilmontant on December 11, he ‘‘asked the sun for advice, got an
   idea into his head, stared at the sun to hypnotize himself, guessing that
   its answer was yes.’’ He thereby seemed to receive approval. ‘‘Lazy
   man, get out of your sorry state’’ it seemed to be telling him, through
   thought transmission.     ‘‘It did not seem   very hard,’’   he added,     ‘‘after
   contemplating suicide, to bite off a finger. I told myself: I can always
   do that.”
    The fact that Gaston F. was influenced by Van Gogh is worth noting only
for the sake of completeness. Once a decision is reached with the violence neces-
sary for the tearing off of a finger, it entirely eludes the literary suggestions that
may have preceded it; the order that the teeth had to carry out so brusquely must
appear as a need that no one could resist. Moreover, the coincidence of the two
painters’ gestures regains its strange freedom at the moment when the same ex-
ternal force, independently chosen on both sides, intervenes in the activity of
teeth or razor: no biography of Van Gogh could induce the Pere-Lachaise muti-
lator’s absurd recourse to the blinding rays of the sun, in order to carry out a
sacrifice no one could bear to see without screaming . . .
    It is relatively easy to establish the extent to which Van Gogh’s life was domi-
nated by the overwhelming relations he maintained with the sun, yet this ques-
tion has never before been raised. The sun paintings by the Man with the
Severed Ear are sufficiently well known and sufficiently unexpected to have dis-
concerted many; they only become intelligible when they are seen as the very
expression of the personality (or, as some would say, of the sickness) of the
painter.? Most were done after Van Gogh’s mutilation (on Christmas night,
1888).   The   obsession,   however,   appears   in two   sketches   (La    Faille,     1374,
 1375)* done during the Paris period (1886-88). The period of Arles is repre-
sented by the three Sowers (La Faille, 422, June 1888; 450 and 451, August
 1888), but these three paintings still show only the sunset. The sun appears ‘‘in
all its glory’’ only in 1889, during the painter’s stay in the mental hospital in
Saint-Rémy, in other words, after his mutilation (see La Faille, 617, June 1889;
628, September 1889 and 710, 713, 720, 729, 736, 737—all without an exact
date). The correspondence of this period indicates that the solar obsession had
finally reached its high point. It is at this time that he uses the expression ‘‘the
sun in all its glory’’ in a letter to his brother and that he probably practiced star-
ing at this blinding sphere from his window (which certain doctors in the past
held to be a sign of incurable madness). After the departure from Saint-Rémy
(January 1890) and until his suicide (July 1890) the sun disappears almost en-
tirely from the paintings.
    But in order to show the importance and the development of Van Gogh'’s
                         SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION      [0 63

obsession, it is necessary to link suns with sunflowers, whose large disk haloed
with short petals recalls the disk of the sun, at which it ceaselessly and fixedly
stares throughout the day. This flower is also simply known (in French) by the
name ‘‘the sun’’; in the history of painting it is linked to the name of Van Gogh,
who wrote that he had a little of the sunflower (in the same way that Berne
‘“has’’ the bear, or Rome ‘‘has’’ the she-wolf). As early as the Paris period, he
had depicted a sunflower elevated on its stalk, isolated in a tiny garden; if most
of the vases of sunflowers were painted at Arles in August 1888, at least two
of the paintings date from the Paris period, and we also know that Gauguin, who
at the time of the crisis of December 1888 was living with him, had just com-
pleted a portrait that shows Van Gogh painting sunflowers. It is probable that
at this time Van Gogh was working on a variant of one of the paintings of August
(he was working, as he often did, from memory, following Gauguin’s example).
The close association between the solar flower obsession and the most exas-
perated torment becomes all the more expressive when the heightened fancy of
the painter sometimes leads to the representation of the flower as withered and
dead (La Faille 452, 453 and fig. 1, p. 10). No one else, it seems, has ever
painted wilted flowers, and Van Gogh himself painted all other flowers as fresh.
    This double bond uniting the sun-star, the sun-flower, and Van Gogh can
moreover be reduced to a normal psychological theme in which the star is op-
posed to the withered flower, as are the ideal term and the real term of the ego.
This is what appears fairly regularly, it seems, in the different variants of the
theme.
    Speaking in a letter to his brother about a painting he liked, he expressed the
wish that it be placed between two vases of sunflowers, like a clock between two
candelabra. It is possible to see the painter himself as an overwhelming incarna-
tion of the candelabrum of sunflowers, attaching to his hat a crown of lighted
candles and going out under this halo at night in Arles (January or February
 1889), under the pretext, as he said, of painting a countryside at night. The very
fragility of this miraculous hat of flames without a doubt expresses the striving
for dislocation that Van Gogh obeyed each time he came under the influence of
a fiery focal point. For example when he represented a candlestick placed on
the seat of Gauguin’s empty chair . . .
    A letter from the painter to his brother, dated December 1888 (Brieven aan
zijn Broeder, no. 563) mentions for the first time ‘“Gauguin’s armchair, red and
green night effect, walls and floor red and green again, on the seat two novels
and a candle . . . ’’“ Van Gogh adds in a second letter, written on January 17,
 1890 (Brieven aan zijn Broeder, no. 571): ‘“I should like De Haan to see a study
of mine of a lighted candle and two novels (one yellow, the other pink) lying
on an empty armchair (really Gauguin’s chair), a size 30 canvas, in red and
green. I have just been working again today on its pendant, my own empty chair,
                            64 □ SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION




        Figure 10. Vincent Van Gogh, The Chair and the Pipe. December 1888-January
         1889 (Arles). Reproduced by courtesy of the Trustees, The National Gallery,
         London.



a white deal chair with a pipe and a tobacco pouch. [This is the painting repro­
duced in La Faille as no. 498.] In these two studies, as in others, I have tried
for an effect of light by means of clear color . . . ” 5
   These two paintings are especially significant in that they date from the period
of the mutilation. One need only look at the reproductions of the paintings to
                          SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION □ 65




         Figure 11. Vincent Van Gogh, The Armchair o f Gauguin, December 1888
         (Arles). Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.


see that they represent not just an armchair or a chair, but the virile personae
of the two painters.
   Due to a lack of information, it is difficult to interpret these paintings with
perfect certainty; one cannot, however, fail to be struck by a contrast to
Gauguin’s advantage: an unlit pipe (an extinguished and suffocating hearth) is
opposed to a lit candle, a tawdry pouch of tobacco (a dessicated and calcified
                         66 [J SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION

substance) is opposed to two novels covered with brightly colored paper. The
difference 1s all the more charged with troubling elements in that it corresponds
to the period in which Van Gogh’s feelings of hatred for his friend were so ex-
treme that they led to a definitive break, but the hatred directed against Gauguin
is only one of the most bitter forms of an inner rending whose theme is generally
found in all of Van Gogh’s mental activity. Gauguin played for his friend the
role of an ideal assuming the most exalted aspirations of Van Gogh’s ego, even
to the point of its most insane consequences: hateful and despairing humiliation,
with its disconcerting counterpart, the close identification of the one who
humiliates with the one who is humiliated. Even the ideal carries within itself
something of the deformities of which it is the exasperated antithesis: the candle
does not solidly adhere to the armchair, where its position is precarious and even
shocking; the sun in its glory is doubtless opposed to the faded sunflower, but
no matter how dead it may be this sunflower is also a sun, and the sun is in some
way deleterious and sick: it is sulfur colored [il a la couleur du soufre], the
painter himself writes twice in French.
    This equivalence of opposing elements still characterizes, in The Armchair
of Gauguin,   the return of the theme in a new system of relations:   in relation to
the illuminated gas jet the unfortunate candle plays the same humiliating role that
the dead pipe plays in relation to the candle; the upturned gas jet only elevates
a little more a break that is, fundamentally, the sign of the irreducible hetero-
geneity of the lacerated (and unrestrained) elements of Van Gogh’s personality.
   The relations between this painter (identifying himself successively with
fragile candles and with sometimes fresh, sometimes faded sunflowers) and an
ideal, of which the sun 1s the most dazzling form, appear to be analogous to
those that men maintained at one time with their gods, at least so long as these
gods stupefied them; mutilation normally intervened in these relations as sacri-
fice: it would represent the desire to resemble perfectly an ideal term, generally
characterized in mythology as a solar god who tears and rips out his own organs.
    In this way the theme connects with Gaston F.’s mutilation, and its meaning
can be emphasized through a third example, in which a man of fire orders a
woman to tear off her ears in order to offer them to him.
   A 34 year old woman, seduced and made pregnant by her employer,
   gave birth to an infant who died a few days after its birth. After this
   the unfortunate woman suffered from a persecution mania accompanied
   by uncontrollable body movements and religious hallucinations. She
   was placed in a mental hospital. One morning, a guard found her tear-
   ing out her right eye: the left ocular globe was completely removed,
   and in the empty socket shreds of the conjunctiva and cellular tissue
   could be seen, as well as adipose tissues; on the right there was a very
   pronounced exophthalmos . . . When interrogated as to the motive
   for her act, the patient stated that she had heard the voice of God and,
                         SACRIFICIAL      MUTILATION      Q    67


  some time later, had seen a man of fire: ‘“Give me your ears, split
  open your head,’”’ the phantom told her. After hitting her head against
  the walls, she tried to tear off her ears, then decided to gouge out her
  eyes. The pain caused by her first efforts was extreme, but the voice
  urged her to overcome the pain and she did not give up. She claims to
  have lost consciousness at that point and cannot explain how she man-
  aged to completely tear out her left eye . . . “

   This case ts especially meaningful in that the substitution of eyes for ears, due
to the lack of a sharp instrument, leads from the mutilation of relatively un-
important parts (such as a finger or an ear) to the Oedipal enucleation, in other
words to the most horrifying form of sacrifice.
   But how 1s it possible that gestures incontestably linked to mental disorder
(even if they can never be seen as the symptoms of a specific mental illness)’
may be spontaneously designated as the adequate expression of a veritable social
function, of an institution as clearly defined, as generally human as sacrifice?
The   interpretation cannot,   however,    be contested       when   it is considered   as an
immediate association, entirely lacking any scientific elaboration. Even in antiq-
uity, the insane were known to have characterized their mutilations in this way:
Areteus® writes of sick people he saw tearing off their own limbs because of reli-
gious feelings and in order to pay homage to gods who demanded this sacrifice.
But it is no less striking that, in our day, with the custom of sacrifice in full de-
cline, the meaning of the word, to the extent that it implies a drive revealed by
an inner experience,* 1s still as closely linked as possible to the notion of a spirit
of sacrifice, of which the automutilation of madmen is only the most absurd and
terrible example.
    It is true that this demented part of the sacrificial domain, the only one that
has remained accessible to us, to the extent that it belongs to our own patho-
logical psychology, cannot simply be opposed to its counterpart, religious sacri-
fices of men and animals: the opposition even exists within religious practice,
which itself confronts classic sacrifice with the most varied and insane forms of
automutilation. In this respect it is the bloody orgies of Islamic sects'° that
appear at the present time with the most dramatic and significant forms: the par-
ticipants, collectively raised to the height of religious frenzy, end up at the hor-
rible omophagous sacrifice, as well as at direct or indirect mutilations, smashing
each other on the head with clubs or axes, throwing themselves on swords,                  or
gouging out their eyes. Whatever the role played by acquired skills, for example
in enucleation, the necessity of throwing oneself or something of oneself out of
oneself remains the psychological or physiological mechanism that in certain
cases can have no other end than death. The celebrations held by fanatics more-
over only reenact in an attenuated form, sometimes in the same regions, the gall-
initiation rites of the priests of Cybele who, overcome by a fit of fury, were
delirious for three days at a time, performing wild leaps and dances, brandishing
                          68 [J SACRIFICIAL     MUTILATION


weapons and cups, striking each other mercilessly, and arriving, while in an in-
credible exaltation, at the sacrifice of their own virility through the use of a
razor, a shell, or a stone.*'
    The circumcision rite, in most cases, does not result in such scenes of delir-
ium; it represents a less exceptional form of the religious ablation of a part of
the body, and even though the patient himself does not act, this rite can be seen
as a kind of collective automutilation. We know that it is practiced in more or
less all parts of the world, by the Israelites, by Muslims, and by a very large
number of the indigenous populations of Africa, Oceania, and America.'? It is
sometimes accompanied by real tortures that can result in death, as, for exam-
ple, among the Becwanas of southern Africa.'” Of course, any practice as diffi-
cult to explain rationally as this has given rise to numerous interpretations: the
best known, which attributes a desire for hygiene to the primitive peoples who
developed this innovation, has long since been discarded; on the other hand the
one that presents this mutilation as sacrifice, even 1f such a generalization 1s de-
batable, is incontestably based on a number of positive examples.'“
   Besides,   whatever may      be the sacrificial nature of circumcision,   it must be
seen above all as an initiation rite, and as such it must be rigorously assimilated
to other mutilations carried out in the same circumstances.'* In particular, the
tearing out of a tooth replaces circumcision in certain parts of New Guinea and
Australia.'® The rupture of personal homogeneity and the projection outside the
self of a part of oneself, with their rage and pain, appear thus to be linked regu-
larly to the expiations, periods of mourning, or debaucheries that are openly
evoked by the ceremony marking the entry into adult society.
   Less widespread    than circumcision,     the practice of the ablation of a finger
is also much less well known; each example 1s quickly passed over by the differ-
ent authors, who limit themselves in general to the indication, in a sentence, of
the habitual occasions for the mutilation.'” It is fairly frequently a matter of
death and the manifestations of despair that follow it; however in India one finds
it connected, for the woman,      to the birth of a child, and sickness plays the same
role in the Tonga Islands. Among Blackfoot Indians, the finger is offered to the
morning star in a propitiation sacrifice. In the Fiji Islands the propitiation could
even be addressed to a living man: when a subject gravely offended his chief,
he cut off his little finger and presented it to the chief in a hollowed-out piece
of bamboo, in order to obtain his pardon.'® It is surprising that this form of muti-
lation is found in most parts of the world: in Australia, in New Guinea, in the
Tonga and Fiji Islands; in Paraguay, in Brazil, and on the northwestern coast
of North America; in Africa among the Pygmies of Lake Ngami, the Hottentots,
the Bushmen. In Greece as well a stone finger set up over tumuli in the country-
side indicated that even in the second century A. D. the custom might not have
always been unknown there. ‘‘ As you go from Megalopolis to Messene,'’ writes
Pausamas,
                           SACRIFICIAL     MUTILATION    [J 69


   after advancing about seven stades, there stands on the left of the high-
   way a sanctuary of the goddesses. They call the goddesses themselves,
   as well as the district around the sanctuary,        Maniae   (Madnesses).     In
   my view this is a surname of the Eumenides; in fact they say that it
   was here that madness overtook Orestes as punishment for shedding
   his mother’s blood. Not far from the sanctuary is a mound of earth, of
   no great size,   surmounted   by a finger made       of stone; the name,     in-
   deed, of the mound is the Tomb of the Finger. Here, it is said,
   Orestes on losing his wits bit off one finger of one of his hands.
   Adjoining this place is another, called Acé (Remedies) because in it
   Orestes was cured of his malady. Here too there is a sanctuary for the
   Eumenides. The story is that, when these goddesses were about to put
   Orestes out of his mind, they appeared to him black; but when he had
   bitten off his finger they seemed to him again to be white and he re-
   covered his senses at the sight.'®

    The strange practice of the ablation of the finger seems to be particularly fre-
quent in a region as archaic as Australia, which does not know sacrifice in the
classic sense of the word. And this fact is doubtless all the more remarkable in
that it is difficult to deny the existence of the same rite in the neolithic period:
in the hand-patterns obtained in caves by applying the hand to the wall and sur-
rounding it with paint, one or several phalanges are missing.“° Analogous prac-
tices found at the present time among the insane would thus appear to be not
only generally human, but also very primitive; madness would only remove
normal obstacles to an impulse as basic as its opposite, the impulse to eat.*'
    Even if there is an egoism that accompanies the appropriation of food and
wealth, the movement that pushes a man in certain cases to give himself (in other
words, to destroy himself) not only partially but completely, so that a bloody
death ensues, can only be compared, in its trresistible and hideous nature, to the
blinding flashes of lightning that transform the most withering storm into trans-
ports of joy. In ritual forms of communal sacrifice, in any case, an animal can
be substituted for the victim—a cowardly gesture. Only a pitiful, substituted vic-
tim ‘‘penetrates into the perilous domain of sacrifice; it dies there,’’ according
to Hubert   and Mauss,??    ‘‘and indeed    it is there in order to die. The sacrificer
remains protected.’’ The freedom from ‘‘all selfish calculation,’’ from all re-
serve, remains nevertheless at the limit of these efforts to remain outside sacri-
fice, to the extent that nightmare creatures, such as gods, are charged with carry-
ing to the very end what ordinary men are happy to dream about: ‘‘the god who
sacrifices himself gives himself irrevocably,”” write Hubert and Mauss.?* ‘“This
time all intermediaries have disappeared. The god, who is at the same time the
sacrifier, is one with the victim and sometimes even with the sacrificer. All the
differing elements that enter into ordinary sacrifice here enter into each other
and become mixed together. But such mixing 1s possible only for mythical, that
                          70 O SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION

is ideal, beings.’’ Hubert and Mauss neglect here examples of the ‘‘sacrifice of
a god’’ that they could have taken from cases of automutilation—and through
which alone sacrifice loses its character as mere performance.
   There is, in fact, no reason to separate Van Gogh’s ear or Gaston F.’s finger
from Prometheus’s famous liver. If one accepts the interpretation that identifies
the purveying eagle (the aetos prometheus of the Greeks) with the god who stole
fire from the wheel of the sun, then the tearing out of the liver presents a theme
in conformity with the various legends of the ‘‘sacrifice of the god.’’?* The roles
are normally shared between the human form of a god and his animal avatar;
sometimes the man sacrifices the animal, sometimes the animal sacrifices the
man, but each time it is a case of automutilation because the animal and the man
form but a single being. The eagle-god who is confused with the sun by the
ancients, the eagle who alone among all beings can contemplate while staring
at “‘the sun in all its glory,”’ the Icarian being who goes to seek the fire of the
heavens is, however, nothing other than an automutilator, a Vincent Van Gogh,
a Gaston F. All the wealth he derives from the mythical delirium is limited to
the incredible vomiting of the liver, ceaselessly devoured and ceaselessly
vomited by the gaping belly of the god.
   If one followed these associations, the use of the sacrificial mechanisms      for
various ends, such as propitiation or expiation, would be seen as secondary, and
one would only retain the elementary fact of the radical alteration of the person
which can be indefinitely associated with any other alteration that suddenly
arises in collective life: for example, the death of a relative, initiation, the con-
sumption of the new harvest . . . Such an action would be characterized by the
fact that it would have the power to liberate heterogeneous elements and to break
the habitual homogeneity of the individual, in the same way that vomiting would
be opposed to its opposite, the communal eating of food. Sacrifice considered
in its essential phase would only be the rejection of what had been appropriated
by a person or by a group.’* Because everything that is rejected from the human
cycle is altered in an altogether troubling way, the sacred things that intervene
at the end of the operation—the victim struck down in a pool of blood, the
severed finger or ear, the torn-out eye—do not appreciably differ from vomited
food. Repugnance is only one of the forms of stupor caused by a horrifying erup-
tion, by the disgorging of a force that threatens to consume. The one who sacri-
fices is free—free to indulge in a similar disgorging, free, continuously identify-
ing with the victim, to vomit his own being just as he has vomited a piece of
himself or a bull, in other words free to throw himself suddenly outside of him-
self, like a gall or an aissaouah.
   Still, one can doubt that even the most furious of those who       have ever torn
and mutilated themselves amid screams and to the beat of a drum have abused
this marvelous freedom to the same extent as Vincent Van Gogh, who carried
his severed car to the place that most offends polite society. It is admirable that
                                SACRIFICIAL      MUTILATION        U   71


in this way he both manifested a love that refused to take anything into account
and in a way spat in the faces of all those who have accepted the elevated and
official idea of life that is so well known. Perhaps the practice of sacrifice has
disappeared from the earth because it was not able to be sufficiently charged
with this element of hate and disgust, without which it appears in our eyes as
servitude. The monstrous ear sent in its envelope, however, abruptly leaves the
magic circle where the rites of liberation stupidly aborted. It leaves along with
the tongue of Anaxarchus of Abdera, bit off and spat bloody in the face of the
tyrant Nicocreon, and with the tongue of a zeno of Elea spat in the face of
Demylos . . . both of these philosophers having been subjected to atrocious
tortures,   the first crushed       while still alive in a mortar.


                                                 Notes

      1. H. Claude, A. Borel, and G. Robin, “Une automutilation révélatrice d’un état schizoma-
niaque” (Annales médico-psychologiques, 1924, vol. 1, pp. 331-39). Dr. Borel himself informed
me of this case when I indicated to him the association I had been led to make between the obsession
with the sun and the automutilation of Van Gogh. This report was therefore not the point of departure
for this connection, but instead it was the confirmation of its interest.
     2. On Van Gogh's sickness, see Jaspers, Strindberg und Van Gogh,           W.   Riese,    ‘*Ueber den
Stilwandel bei Vincent Van Gogh,'’ (Zeitschrift fiir die Gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie, 2 May
1925); W. Riese, Vincent Van Gogh in der Krankheit,       1926; and V. Doiteau and E. Leroy, La Folie
de Vincent Van Gogh, 1928. The conclusions of these different authors are contradictory and incon-
clusive. They are not taken into account in the present article, which considers a psychological trait
taking from sickness only its unbridled character.
      3. J. B. de la Faille, L'Oeuvre de Vincent Van Gogh, 1928.
      4. [See The Complete Letters of Vincent Van Gogh (Greenwich, Conn.: New York Graphic
Society, 1958), vol. 3, p. 108. Tr.]
     5. [The Complete Letters of Vincent Van Gogh, vol. 3, p. 121. Tr.]
     6. After Ideler (Allgemeine Zeitschrift für Psychiatrie, vol. 27), quoted by M.          Lorthiois, De
[ ‘automutilation, Mutilations et suicides étranges, Paris, 1909, p. 94, along with eleven other cases
of voluntary enucleation. The work of Lorthiois gives an overview of automutilation, which is sur-
prisingly frequent. Many of the mentally ill link their mutilation to a religious delirium or to feelings
of guilt.
      7. This is the clearly expressed opinion of Charles Blondel, in Les Automutilateurs (Paris,
1906). I do not think it possible to prove him wrong.
     8. A famous Greek doctor of the first century A. D., the author of De morborum diuturnorum
et acutorum causis, signis et curatione. The vocabulary of sacrifice is still used spontaneously by
Montaigne when he reports a case of automutilation in chapter 4 of his Essais: mortified by an
amorous adventure in which he behaved foolishly, a gentleman ‘‘mutilated himself and sent his mis-
tress the organs that had disobeyed him in his desires, as a kind of bloody victim capable of expiating
the offense he believed he had committed against her.’’
     9. It is not a question here of the vulgar figurative sense of the word sacrifice, but rather of
the facts with which it has remained unconsciously associated.
    10. See J. Herber, Les Hamadan et les Djoughiyyin (Hesperis,        1923, pp. 217-36), which gives
a bibliography of works on all sects; see also the extraordinary account of an Aissaouah celebration
that ended with the death of a man, in E. Masquerey, Souvenirs et visions d'Afrique.
     11. See C. Vellay, Le Culte et les fêtes d'Adonis Thammouz, Paris, 1905.
                                 72 O SACRIFICIAL MUTILATION


       12. The ancient Egyptians also practiced circumcision; see the bibliography and the classifica-
tory map in E. M. Loeb’s The Blood Sacrifice Complex, 1923 (Memoirs of the American Anthropo-
logical Association, vol. 30).
     13. See J. Brown, ‘‘Circumcision Rites of the Becwanas Tribes,’’ (Journal of the Royal Anthro-
pological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, 1928).
       14. See Henri Hubert and Marcel Mauss, Mélanges d 'histoire des religions, 1909, pp. 125-26.
[Bataille is referring to the Essai sur la nature et la fonction du sacrifice contained in this collection;
English translation, Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function, trans. W. D. Halls (Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press, 1964), pp. 98-99. Tr.] E. M. Loeb (op. cit.) examines the question and argues
that it is a matter of sacrifice, citing a number of authors.
     15. See, among others, Karsten, The Civilisation of South American Indians, London, 1926.
     16. On the association made by frightened children between circumcision, the removal of a
tooth, and castration, see Freud, Totem and Taboo (French translation), p. 410, note 1. [English
translation: Totem and Taboo, trans. A. A. Brill (New York: Vintage Books, 1946), p. 197, note
87. Tr.]
     17. See the bibliography in Loeb (op. cit.), pp. 39-40.
     18. See H. Hale, U. S. Exploring Expedition, 1846, p. 66.
     19. Pausanias, Description of Greece, book VIII, chapter 34. [We quote from the Loeb Classical
Library translation by W. H. S. Jones (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1935), vol. 4, pp.
69-71. Tr.]
     20. See Luquet, L'Art et la religion des hommes fossiles, Paris, 1926, p. 222, in which the thesis
that the fingers were only concealed (folded over) is unconvincingly argued.
    21. In omophagia and in the example of Oedipus eating his finger, the two impulses are produced
simultaneously, but in both cases what is eaten normally is found repugnant, which changes com-
pletely the meaning of the appropriation.
     22. Mélanges d’histoire des religions, Paris, 1909, p. 125. {Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function,
p. 98. Tr.]
     23. Mélanges d’histoire . . . , p. 127. [Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function, p. 101. Tr.] Of
course, the general argument of Hubert and Mauss's essay is noticeably different from the one
sketched out here; nevertheless it is to this work that an effort at interpretation, much too hastily
presented in this article, refers. It is necessary to state here that Freud, in Totem and Taboo, referred
to the earlier work of Robertson Smith (Religion of the Semites [Edinburgh: À. and C. Black, 1889]),
and discounted the objections of Hubert and Mauss. [The ‘‘sacrifier,”’ in the English translation of
Hubert and Mauss we are quoting, refers to ‘‘the subject to whom the benefits of sacrifice accrue.’’
Tr.]
       24. See S. Reinach,   ‘‘Aetos Prometheus’’    (Cultes, mythes, et religions, vol. 3, 1911, pp.
68-91). I cite the example of Prometheus here, in spite of the hypothetical nature of the interpreta-
tion, because of the particularly striking connection with Van Gogh and Gaston F. There are, other
than Prometheus, numerous examples of the sacrifice of the God.
    25. The drive behind such facts 1s eminently social in primitive societies, whereas it is hunger
that seems to play the social role in current societies.
The Jesuve




I have acquired over what happens to me a power that overwhelms me; since
everything that follows refers to the traditional practice of ‘“sacrifice,’’ I do not
hesitate to write, even though in relation to me it is painfully comical, that it
is a power analogous to that of a priest who slashes the throat of a cow. At the
moment   when the priest, armed with a knife (and with the priest, a dirty death)
heads toward the cow, which is just a random animal, undifferentiated from any
other cow that ruminates    in a field, it becomes   a divinity because of the circle
traced around its legs. Thus the priest soon has the exorbitant possibility of open-
ing the throat of the creature he had wanted to slash.
    The practice of sacrifice has today fallen into disuse and yet it has been, due
to its universality, a human action more significant than any other. Indepen-
dently of each other, different peoples invented different forms of sacrifice, with
the goal of answering a need as inevitable as hunger. It is therefore not astonish-
ing that the necessity of satisfying such a need, under the conditions of present-
day life, leads an isolated man into disconnected and even stupid behavior.
    I thus allude to a series of trifles, of mean gestures, of errors, of a sort that
no one would want to linger over, for fear of falling into a refinement of sensa-
tion or into intellectual complexities that apparently lead nowhere. From now
on I must therefore insist upon the fact that in this order of things it is neither
the singular character nor the exasperating minutiae of these stories that, it
seems to me, are of interest to others than myself, but only a certain result fore-
seen with the aid of repellent detours. That which necessitates in consciousness
mechanisms of an unparalleled complexity has a narrowly limited value, and it

                                         73
                                 74 U   THE JESUVE


is almost odious that certain things have not remained in the unconscious state —
but since it is not a question of sheepishly holding to what is already known,
I see no reason not to provoke violently my comrades to perhaps unhoped-for
excesses, even by entering into details that others, seemingly more virile, will
judge tiresome and decadent.

                                 The Pineal Eye
Given a certain latitude of interpretation, the entire conception—and at the same
time the obsession—expressed by the image of the pineal eye and explained
below goes back to the beginning of the year 1927, exactly during the period
in which I wrote The Solar Anus, in other words a year before the eye appeared
to me to be definitively linked to bullfighting images. I believe it necessary to
furnish this chronological data before going on to considerations of a very gen-
eral order, because those considerations present indissoluble links with facts as
insignificant as a series of images.
    The pineal eye probably corresponds to the anal (in other words nocturnal)
conception that I initially had of the sun and that I then expressed in a phrase
such as ‘‘the intact anus . . . to which nothing sufficiently blinding can be
compared except the sun (even though the anus 1s the night).”’ T imagined the
eye at the summit of the skull like a horrible errupting volcano, precisely with
the shady and comical character associated with the rear end and its excretions.
Now the eye is without any doubt the symbol of the dazzling sun and the one
[ imagined at the summit of my skull was necessarily on fire, since it was
doomed to the contemplation of the sun at the apogee of its brilliance. The imag1-
nation of the ancients attributed to the eagle as solar bird the faculty of con-
templating the sun face to face. In the same way an excessive interest in the
simple represenation of the pineal eye is necessarily interpreted as an irresistible
desire to become a sun oneself (a blind sun or a blinding sun, it hardly matters).
In the case of the eagle, as in the case of my own imagination, the act of directly
looking 1s the equivalent of identification. But the cruel and shattering character
of this absurd desire soon appears, due to the fact that the eagle is cast down
from the heights of the skies—and, as for the eye that opens in the middle of
the skull, the result, even imaginary, is much more terrifying, though horribly
ridiculous.
    During this period, I did not hesitate to think seriously of the possibility that
this extraordinary eye would finally really come to light through the bony roof
of the head, because I believed it necessary that, after a long period of servility,
human beings would have an eye just for the sun (whereas the two eyes in their
sockets turn away from it with a kind of stupid obstinacy). I was not insane but
I made too much of the necessity of leaving, in one way or another, the limits
of our human experience, and I adapted myself in a fairly disordered way so that
                                 THE JESUVE    0O   75

the most improbable thing in the world (the most overwhelming as well, some-
thing like foam on the lips) would at the same time appear to me to be necessary.
I imagined on the one hand plants, which are uniformly animated by a vertical
movement analogous to that of tides, which regularly elevate water, and on the
other hand animals, which are animated by a horizontal movement analogous to
that of the turning earth. Thus I arrived at reductions that were extremely simple
and geometric but at the same time monstrously comic (for example, I saw that
the alternating movement of all the coituses on the surface of the earth is similar
to that of locomotive pistons, so that the continual movement of coituses on the
surface of the earth is as closely tied to the earth’s rotation as the movement of
pistons is to that of wheels). Man appears in this brutal system as an animal
exceptionally animated by the erection-movement that projects plants in a
vertical direction, comparable to the male mammal who raises himself on his
hind legs when mounting the female, but much more categorically erect, as erect
as a penis.

    Even today I do not hesitate to write that these first considerations on the posi-
tions of plants, animals, and men in a planetary system, far from appearing
uniquely absurd to me, can be given as the basis for all considerations on human
nature. And it is in fact from these that I undertake a certain preliminary exposi-
tion, whose meticulous elaboration is recent. In my opinion it is extremely
curious to note that, in the course of the progressive erection that goes from the
quadruped to Homo erectus, the aspect of ignominy grows to the point of reach-
ing horrifying proportions—from the pretty lemur, still almost horizontal and
scarcely baroque, to the gorilla. From there, on the contrary, primate evolution
moves in the direction of a beauty whose appearance is more and more noble,
through Pithecanthropus erectus and Homo neanderthalensis, primitive types
whose erection is not yet complete, up to Homo sapiens who, alone among all
the animals, attains a stiffness and a radical rectitude in military drill. If a race
like the human race was not able to be born directly from a noble animal species,
but only from a species whose origin was noble but which became repugnant
trash in relation to the totality of mammals, it is perhaps not possible to look
at the shit-smeared and obscene anuses of certain apes with the usual
detachment.   There is no child who has not at one time or another admired,         in
zoos, these filthy protuberances, dazzlingly colored excremental skulls,
sometimes dappled, going from shocking pink to an extraordinarily horrible,
pearly violet. It 1s likely that a certain potential for brilliance and dazzle proper
to animal nature, which generally drifts toward the head (the buccal orifice), as
much in man as in certain animals, was capable of drifting in apes toward the
contrary extremity, in other words toward the anal orifice. This horrifying
anomaly could even be represented, in a logical enough way, as the sign of an
unbalanced nature (since the state of equilibrium is given by the common hori-
                                    76   1 THE JESUVE

zontal position). It is true that birds have found an equilibrium in an interme-
diary position, but it is fairly evident that that is a new equilibrium entirely dif-
ferent from that of the other animals, and determined by flight, in other words
by a movement of displacement as continuous as that of the quadrupeds; the
movement from branch to branch that determined the semivertical stance of apes
implied, on the contrary, a movement of discontinuous displacement that never
permitted a new harmony, and it developed little by little a manner of being and
at the same time a monstrous appearance. Living in forests, more or less shel-
tered from the light of the sun, sometimes        almost in the darkness of a cellar,
clumsily swinging from one branch to another, apes are destined by a certain
mode of life to a never-composed agitation, to a bizarre instability the very sight
of which is extremely irritating; the obscene blossoming of their bald, haloed
anuses, bursting like boils, is thus produced in a system denied any center of
gravity and without resistance—perhaps because, there as elsewhere, the least
rupture of equilibrium suffices for the liberation of the indecencies of nature,
with the most shameful obscenity.
    Anthropologists admit that the ancestors of man started to stand up straight
from the moment they had to leave the forest (it is possible to imagine that the
hideous animals were overcome by panic, for example, in the course of an
immense fire). Deprived of the support of trees, but still used to moving around
almost upright, they must have been reduced, fairly comically, to a stupid alter-
nation between walking on four feet and walking vertically. But they could only
keep themselves standing upright by gradually finding equilibrium, in other
words, by giving some form of continuity and harmony to their movements. It
appears plausible to admit, given the extraordinary difficulty represented by the
vertical posture, that the early equilibrium of movements would have been pre-
carious if it had not been developed—in other words, if it had not progressively
led to the total equilibrium of forms to which we are habituated: phallic erection
and regular beauty. Evolution up to the human form appears as a mechanically
necessary return to a plastic harmony that had already been developed horizon-
tally in the common ancestors of the monkey and the lemurs. Anthropologists,
in spite of the extreme scarcity of data, have reconstituted the modalities of this
evolution, above all in what concerns the bone structure of the head. The blos-
soming of the superior part of the skull starts with Pithecanthropus erectus,
continues with Homo neanderthalensis, and is more or less perfectly accom-
plished in the different human types that exist today. The summit of the head
has become—psychologically—the focal point of the new equilibrium. Every-
thing in the bone structure that goes against the vertical impulse of the human
being, such as the projection of the eye sockets and the jaws (a memory of the
disorder and the urges of the ape and still half-horizontal), has almost entirely
disappeared. But the reduction of the projection of the anal orifice is, to tell the
truth, much   more   significant.
                                 THE   JESUVE    U   77


   I am obliged to state that this account already raises numerous difficulties,
and I hasten to add that, for the moment,       I have no intention of resolving them
as explicitly as is fitting. If I put forward here some conceptions, it is almost
exclusively to characterize accidents, psychological or not, almost voluntary
aberrations and insanities that carried them along or that they express or that
they provoked. Thus I limit myself to indicating that the notion of equilibrium
which plays such an important role in this account is in no way a hollow or arbi-
trary notion. It would probably be easy to study the more or less regular dis-
placements of the center of gravity in the walking or running of various animals,
and to show that what is called the beauty of forms is only an attribute of the
continuous modes of displacement in which the equilibrium of the body in move-
ment permits an important economy of force. Thus one understands that beauty,
in the academic sense of the word, is reducible to a geometric simplification of
lines (composite photographs permit one to obtain a human face of the Greek
type with the aid of a certain number of irregular faces; the superimposed fea-
tures, when mixed, allow only a regular constant to be seen). As brief and as
insufficient as this allusion is, I think that it nevertheless permits one to represent
as mechanically explicable the radical transformation of the hindquarters of the
first men. Anal obscenity, pushed to such a point that the most representative
apes even got rid of their tails (which hide the anuses of other mammals),       com-
pletely disappeared from the fact of human evolution. The human anus secluded
itself deep within flesh, in the crack of the buttocks, and it now forms a projec-
tion only in squatting and excretion. All the potential for blossoming, all the pos-
sibilities for the liberation of energy, now under normal conditions found the
way open only toward the superor regions of the buccal orifices, toward the
throat, the brain, and the eyes. The blossoming of the human face, gifted with
the voice, with diverse modes of expression, and with the gaze, is like a confla-
gration, having the possibility of unleashing immense quantities of energy in the
form of bursts of laughter, tears, or sobs; it succeeded the explosiveness that up
to that point had made the anal orifice bud and flame.
    Now I have given all these explanations only to say finally that when I
imagined the disconcerting possibility of the pineal eye, I had no intention other
than to represent discharges of energy at the top of the head—discharges as
violent and as indecent as those that make the anal protuberances of some apes
so horrible to see. I was not conscious of it originally, but my imagination did
not go on without giving me horrible brain-transports, accompanied by an in-
tense satisfaction; this eye that [ wanted to have at the top of my skull (since
I had read that its embryo   existed, like the seed of a tree, in the interior of the
skull) did not appear to me as anything other than a sexual organ of unheard-of
sensitivity, which would have vibrated, making me let out atrocious screams,
the screams of a magnificent but stinking ejaculation. Everything that I can
recall of my reactions and my aberrations in this period, and moreover the
                                 78 J THE JESUVE

normal symbolic value of a lightning-flash image, permits me today to
characterize this pineal eye fantasy as an excremental fantasy. Besides, it would
have been impossible for me to speak explicitly of it, to express totally what I
felt so violently in early 1927 (and it still happens that I bitterly feel it) in any
other way than by speaking of the nudity of an ape’s anal projection, which on
a day in July of the same year, in the Zoological Gardens of London,
overwhelmed me to the point of throwing me into a kind of ecstatic brutishness.
Today as I write, what I imagine of the pineal eye attains, through the course
of a certain disorder, a brutality of erection so terrifying that I cannot imagine
the enormous anal fruit of radial and shit-smeared raw pink meat (the one that
struck me so in London) other than as an ignoble skull that I would smash with
an axe blow, a rattled grunt deep in my throat. The axe blade would sink into
this imaginary skull, like the cleavers of butchers that split in two, in a violent
blow struck on the block, the sickening heads of skinned rabbits. For it is not
self-evident that the noble parts of a human being (his dignity, the nobility that
characterizes his face), instead of allowing only a sublime and measured flow
of profound and tumultuous impulses, brusquely cease to set up the least barrier
against a sudden, bursting eruption, as provocative and as dissolute as the one
that inflates the anal protuberance of an ape . . .
The Pineal Eye




         When my face is flushed with blood, it becomes red and
      obscene.
         It betrays, at the same time, through morbid reflexes, a
      bloody erection and a demanding thirst for indecency and cri-
      minal debauchery.
         For that reason I am not afraid to affirm that my face is a
      scandal and that my passions are only expressed by the Jesuve.


         The terrestrial globe is covered with volcanoes, which serve
      as its anus.
         Although this globe eats nothing, it often violently ejects the
      contents of its entrails.
         These contents shoot out with a racket, and fall back, stream-
      ing down.
                                                           The Solar Anus


           I. Scientific Anthropology and Mythical Anthropology

To the extent that a description of human life that goes back to the origins tries
to represent what the formless universe has accomplished in producing man
rather than something else, how it has been led to this useless production and

                                        79
                              80 U THE PINEAL EYE

by what means it made this creature something different from all the rest—to
this extent it is necessary to abandon scientific anthropology, which is reduced
to a babbling even more senile than puerile, reduced to giving answers that tend
to make the questions put to it seem ludicrous, whereas these answers alone are
miserably so when confronted with the inevitable and demanding brutality of an
interrogation taking upon itself the very meaning of the life that this anthro-
pology supposedly aims to describe.
    But in the first phase, at least, philosophical speculation is rejected with no
less impatience than the impotent theories of prehistory when this speculation,
obeying the dictates of a guilty conscience, almost always kills itself or timidly
prostrates itself before science. For even if this inhuman prostration can still be
denounced, even if it is still possible for man to contrast his own cruelty and
madness with a necessity that is crushing him, nothing of what is known of the
means proper to philosophical investigation can inspire in him any confidence;
philosophy has been, up to this point, as much as science, an expression of hu-
man subordination, and when man seeks to represent himself, no longer as a
moment of a homogeneous process—of a necessary and pitiful process—but as
a new laceration within a lacerated nature, it is no longer the leveling phrase-
ology coming to him from the understanding that can help him: he can no longer
recognize himself in the degrading chains of logic, but he recognizes himself,
 instead—not only with rage but in an ecstatic torment—in the virulence of his
own phantasms.
    Nevertheless, the introduction of a lawless intellectual series into the world
of legitimate thought defines itself at the outset as the most arduous and auda-
cious operation. And it is evident that if it were not practiced without equivoca-
tion, with a resolution and a rigor rarely attained in other cases, it would be the
most vain operation.
    Outside of a certain inaccessibility to fear—it is a question here essentially
of undergoing, without being overwhelmed, the attraction of the most repulsive
objects—two conditions thrust themselves on anyone whose object is to invest
understanding with a content that will remain foreign to it, and they do so not
only in a clear and distinct way, but as imperative prescriptions.


               II. Conditions of Mythological Representation

In the first place, methodical knowledge can only be brushed aside to the extent
that it has become an acquired faculty, since, at least in the present circum-
stances, without close contact with the homogeneous world of practical life, the
free play of intelligible images would lose itself and would dissolve fatally in
a region where no thought and no word would have the slightest consequence.
    It is thus necessary to start by reducing science to a state that must be defined
by the term subordination, in such a way that one uses it freely, like a beast of
                              THE   PINEAL   EYE   (1 81


burden, to accomplish ends which are not its own. Left to itself, free in the poor-
est sense of the word (where liberty is only impotence), inasmuch as its legacy
as the first condition of existence was the task of dissipating and annihilating
mythological phantasms, nothing could keep science from blindly emptying the
universe of its human content. But it is possible to use it to limit its own move-
ment and to situate beyond its own     limits what it will never attain, that before
which it becomes an unsuccessful effort and a vague, sterile being. It is true that,
posed in this way by science, these elements are still only empty terms and im-
potent paralogisms. It is only after having passed from these exterior limits of
another existence to their mythologically lived content that it becomes possible
to treat science with the indifference demanded by its specific nature, but this
takes place only on condition that one has first enslaved science through the use
of weapons borrowed from it, by making it itself produce the paralogisms that
limit it.
   The second condition is, first of all, only one of the forms of the first; here
too science is utilized for a contrary end. The exclusion of mythology by reason
is necessarily a rigorous one, on which there is no going back, and which, when
required, must be made still more trenchant. But at the same time, it is necessary
to overturn the values created by means      of this exclusion;   in other words,   the
fact that reason denies any valid content in a mythological series is the condition
 of its most significant value. For if the affective violence of human intelligence
 is projected like a specter across the deserted night of the absolute or of science,
 it does not follow that this specter has anything in common with the night in
 which its brilliance becomes glacial. On the contrary, a spectral content only
 truly exists as such from the moment when the milieu that contains it defines
 itself through its intolerance toward that which appears in it as a crime. The
 strongest repulsion by science that can be represented is necessary for the
 characterization of the excluded part. Such a characterization must be compared
 to the affective charge of an obscene element whose obscenity derives only from
the prohibition leveled against it. So long as the formal exclusion has not taken
place, a mythical statement can still be assimilated to a rational statement; the
mythical can be described as real and can be methodically explained. But at the
same time it loses its spectral characterization, its free falseness. It enters, as
in the case of revealed imperative religions, into various mystical groupings that
have as a goal the narrow enslavement of impoverished men to an economic
necessity: in other words, in the last analysis, to an authority that exploits them.
    It is true that such an operation would be inconceivable at the present time,
due to the fact that the possibilities have been limited by the very development
of science.
    Science, proceeding on the basis of a mystical conception of the universe, has
separated the constituent elements of the universe into two profoundly distinct
classes: it has elaborated, through assimilation, the necessary and practical
                               82 U THE PINEAL EYE

parts, transforming a mental activity, which previously was only an instrument
of exploitation, into an activity useful for man’s material life. At the same time,
it has had to brush aside the delirious parts of the old religious constructions,
in order to destroy them. But this act of destruction becomes, at the final point
of development, an act of liberation: delirium escapes from necessity, casts off
its heavy mantel of mystical servitude, and it is finally only then that, nude and
lubricious, it plays with the universe and its laws as if they were toys.


                               IM. The Pineal Eye
Starting from these two principles, and supposing that the first condition, which
requires a scientific knowledge of the objects considered, has at least to a large
extent been met, nothing stands in the way of a phantomlike and adven-
turous description of the universe. What remains to be said about the ways in
which this description proceeds—and about the relations of the finished descrip-
tion with the object it describes—can only be a reflection on the realized exper-
ience.
   The eye, at the summit of the skull, opening on the incandescent sun in order
to contemplate it in a sinister solitude, is not a product of the understanding,
but is instead an immediate existence; it opens and blinds itself like a conflagra-
tion, or like a fever that eats the being, or more exactly, the head. And thus
it plays the role of a fire in a house; the head, instead of locking up life as
money is locked in a safe, spends it without counting, for, at the end of this
erotic metamorphosis, the head has received the electric power of points. This
great burning head is the image and the disagreeable light of the notion of ex-
penditure, beyond the still empty notion as it is elaborated on the basis of
methodical analysis.
    From the first, myth is identified not only with life but with the loss of life—
with degradation and death. Starting from the being who bore it, it is not at all
an external product, but the form that this being takes in his lubricious avatars,
in the ecstatic gift he makes of himself as obscene and nude victim—and a victim
not before an obscure and immaterial force, but before great howls of prosti-
tutes’ laughter.
    Existence no longer resembles a neatly defined itinerary from one practical
sign to another, but a sickly incandescence, a durable orgasm.


                    IV. The Two     Axes of Terrestrial Life

No matter how blinding the mythical form, insofar as it is not a simple represen-
tation, but the exhausting consumption of being, it 1s possible, at its first indis-
tinct appearance, to pass from a content to a container, to a circumstantial form
                               THE PINEAL EYE (] 83

that, although it is probably unacceptable from the point of view of science, does
not seem different from the habitual constructs of the intellect.
    The distribution of organic existence on the surface of the earth takes place
on two axes: the first, vertical, prolongs the radius of the terrestrial sphere; the
second, horizontal, is perpendicular to the first. Vegetation develops more or
less exclusively on the vertical axis (which is also the axis of the fall of bodies);
on the other hand, the development of animal life is situated, or tends to be situ-
ated, on the horizontal axis. But although, generally speaking, their movements
are only slippages parallel to the lines described by the rotation of the terrestrial
globe, animals are never completely foreign to the axis of vegetal life. Thus
existence makes them raise themselves above the ground when they come into
the world and, in a relatively stable way, when they exit from sleep or love (on
the other hand, sleep and death abandon bodies to a force directed from high
to low). Their skeleton, even in the most regular cases, is not perfectly adjusted
to a horizontal trajectory: the skull and thus the orifice of the eyes are situated
above the level of the anal vertebra. However, even if one refers to the position
of the male in coitus, and to the structures of some birds, a complete verticality
is never attained.


                V. The Position of the Human Body and Eyes
                   on the Surface of the Terrestrial Globe
Only human beings, tearing themselves away from peaceful animal horizontal-
ity, at the cost of the ignoble and painful efforts that can be seen in the faces
of the great apes, have succeeded in appropriating the vegetal erection and in
letting themselves be polarized, in a certain sense, by the sky.
    It is thus that the Earth—whose immense regions are covered with plants that
everywhere flee it in order to offer and destroy themselves endlessly, in order
to project themselves into an alternately light and dark celestial void—releases
to the disappointing immensity of space the totality of laughing or lacerated men.
    But, in this liberation of man, which leads to a suffocating absence of limits
on the surface of the globe, human nature is far from surrendering without resis-
tance. For if it is true that his blood, bones, and arms, that the shuddering of
his pleasure (or still more the silence of true dread)—if it is true that his senile
laughter and his insipid hate are endlessly lost and rise toward a sky as beautiful
as death, as pale and implausible as death, his eyes continue to fetter him tightly
to vulgar things, in the midst of which necessity has determined his steps.
    The horizontal axis of vision, to which the human structure has remained
strictly subjected, in the course of man’s wrenching rejection of animal nature,
is the expression of a misery all the more oppressive in that it is apparently con-
fused with serenity.
                                   84 {1 THE PINEAL EYE

                               VI. The Vertigo-Tree

For the anthropologist who can only observe it, this contradiction of axes of the
human structure is devoid of meaning. And if, without even being able to ex-
plain itself, anthropology underscored the importance of the axes, it would only
betray an unjustifiable tendency toward mysticism. The description of the per-
pendicular axes only takes on its value once it becomes possible to construct on
these axes the puerile play of a mythological existence, answering no longer to
observation or deduction but to a free development of the relations between the
immediate and varied consciousness of human life and the supposedly uncon-
scious givens that constitute this life.
    Thus the pineal eye, detaching itself from the horizontal system of normal
ocular vision, appears in a kind of nimbus of tears, like the eye of a tree or, per-
haps, like a human tree. At the same time this ocular tree is only a giant (ignoble)
pink penis, drunk with the sun and suggesting or soliciting a nauseous malaise,
the sickening despair of vertigo. In this transfiguration of nature, during which
vision itself, attracted by nausea, is torn out and torn apart by the sunbursts into
which    it stares, the erection ceases to be a painful upheaval      on the surface of
the earth and, in a vomiting of flavorless blood, it transforms itself into a vertigi-
nous fall in celestial space, accompanied by a horrible cry.


                                      VIT. The Sun
The sun, situated at the bottom of the sky like a cadaver at the bottom of a pit,
answers this inhuman cry with the spectral attraction of decomposition. Im-
mense nature breaks its chains and collapses into the limitless void. A severed
penis, soft and bloody, is substituted for the habitual order of things. In its folds,
where painful jaws still bite, pus, spittle, and larva accumulate, deposited by
enormous flies: fecal like the eye painted at the bottom of a vase, this Sun, now
borrowing    its brilliance from    death,   has buried existence   in the stench of the
night.


                                    VIII.    The Jesuve

The terrestrial globe has retained its enormity like a bald head, in the middle
of which the eye that opens on the void is both volcanic and lacustrine. It extends
its disastrous countryside into the deep folds of hairy flesh, and the hairs that
form its bush are inundated with tears. But the troubled feelings of a degradation
even stranger than death do not have their source in a typical brain: heavy intes-
tines alone press under this nude flesh, as charged with obscenity as a rear
end—one that is just as satanic as the equally nude bottom a young sorceress
raises to the black sky at the moment her fundament opens, to admit a flaming
torch.
                               THE   PINEAL   EYE   O   85


    The love-cry torn from this comic crater is a feverish sob and a rattling blast
of thunder.
    The fecal eye of the sun has also torn itself from these volcanic entrails, and
the pain of a man who tears out his own eyes with his fingers is no more absurd
than this anal maternity of the sun.


                          IX. The Sacrifice of the Gibbon
The intolerable cry of cocks has a solar significance because of the pride and
feeling of triumph of the man perceiving his own dejecta under the open sky.
In the same way, during the night, an immense, troubled love, sweet as a young
girl’s spasm, abandons and throws itself into a giant universe, with the intimate
feeling of having urinated the stars.
    In order to renew this tender pact between belly and nature, a rotting forest
offers its deceptive latrines, swarming with animals, colored or venomous in-
sects, worms,   and little birds. Solar light decomposes in the high branches.    An
Englishwoman, transfigured by a halo of blond hair, abandons her splendid body
to the lubricity and the imagination (driven to the point of ecstasy by the stunning
odor of decay) of a number of nude men.
    Her humid lips open to kisses like a sweet swamp, like a noiseless flowing
river, and her eyes, drowned      in pleasure, are as immensely   lost as her mouth.
Above the entwined human        beasts who embrace and handle her, she raises her
marvelous head, so heavy with dazzlement, and her eyes open on a scene of
madness.

    Near a round pit, freshly dug in the midst of exuberant vegetation, a giant
female gibbon struggles with three men, who tie her with long cords: her face
ts even more stupid than it is ignoble, and she lets out unbelievable screams of
fear, screams answered by the various cries of small monkeys in the high
branches. Once she is trussed up like a chicken—with her legs folded back
against her body—the three men tie her upside down to a stake planted in the
middle of the pit. Attached in this way, her bestially howling mouth swallows
dirt while, on the other end, her huge screaming pink anal protrusion stares at
the sky like a flower (the end of the stake runs between her belly and her bound
paws): only the part whose obscenity stupefies emerges above the top level of
the pit.
    Once these preparations are finished, all the men and women present (there
are, in fact, several other women,     no less taken with debauchery) surround the
pit: at this moment they are all equally nude, all equally deranged by the avidity
of pleasure (exhausted by voluptuousness), breathless, at wits’ end . . .
   They   are all armed    with shovels,   except the Englishwoman:   the earth des-
tined to fill the pit is spread evenly around it. The ignoble gibbon, in an ignoble
                               86 [0 THE PINEAL EYE

posture, continues her terrifying howl, but, on a signal from the Englishwoman,
everyone busies himself shoveling dirt into the pit, and then quickly stamps it
down: thus, in the blink of an eye, the horrible beast is buried alive.
    A relative silence settles: all the stupefied glances are fixed on the filthy,
beautifully blood-colored solar prominence, sticking out of the earth and ridicu-
lously shuddering with convulsions of agony. Then the Englishwoman with her
charming rear end stretches her long nude body on the filled pit: the mucous-
flesh of this bald false skull, a little soiled with shit at the radiate flower of its
summit, is even more upsetting to see when touched by pretty white fingers. All
those around hold back their cries and wipe their sweat; teeth bite lips; a light
foam even flows from overly agitated mouths: contracted by strangulation, and
even by death, the beautiful boil of red flesh is set ablaze with stinking brown

ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo



ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo


    Like a storm that erupts and, after several minutes of intolerable delay, rav-
ishes in semidarkness an entire countryside with insane cataracts of water and
blasts of thunder, in the same disturbed and profoundly overwhelming way
(albeit with signs infinitely more difficult to perceive), existence itself shudders
and attains a level where there is nothing more than a hallucinatory void, an odor
of death that sticks in the throat.
   In reality, when this puerile little vomiting took place, it was not on a mere
carcass that the mouth of the Englishwoman crushed her most burning, her
sweetest kisses, but on the nauseating JESUVE:       the bizarre noise of kisses, pro-
longed   on flesh, clattered   across   the disgusting   noise of bowels.   But these
unheard-of events had set off orgasms, each more suffocating and spasmodic
than its predecessor, in the circle of unfortunate observers; all throats were
choked by raucous sighs, by impossible cries, and, from all sides, eyes were
moist with the brilliant tears of vertigo. .    . . . . . . . ..    . ... .. ...

    The sun vomited like a sick drunk above the mouths full of comic screams,
in the void of an absurd sky . . . And thus an unparalleled heat and stupor
formed an alliance—as excessive as torture: like a severed nose, like a torn-out
tongue—and celebrated a wedding (celebrated it with the blade of a razor on
pretty, insolent rear ends), the little copulation of the stinking hole with the
sun . . .


                                X. The Bronze Eye
The little girls who surround the animal cages in zoos cannot help but be stunned
by the ever-so lubricious rear ends of apes. To their puerile understanding, thesc
creatures—who seem to exist only for the purpose of coupling with men—mouth
                             THE   PINEAL    EYE   U   87


to mouth, belly to belly—with the most doubtful parts of nature—propose enig-
mas whose perversity 1s barely burlesque. Girls cannot avoid thinking of their
own little rear ends, of their own dejecta against which crushing interdictions
have been leveled: but the image of their personal indecency, conveyed to them
by the parti-colored, red, or mauve anal baldness of some apes, reaches, on the
other side of the bars of the cage, a comic splendor and a suffocating atrocity.
When the mythological deliria dissipate, after having fatigued the spirit through
a lack of connections and through a disproportion to the real needs of life, the
phantoms banished from all sides, abandoning the sun itself to the vulgarity of
a nice day, make room for forms without mystery, through which one can easily
make one’s way, with no other goal than defined objects. But all it takes is an
idiotic ape in his cage and a little girl (who blushes at seeing him take a crap),
to rediscover suddenly the fleeing troop of phantoms, whose obscene sniggers
have just charged a rear end as shocking as a sun.
    What science cannot do—which is to establish the exceptional signification,
the expressive value of an excremental orifice emerging from a hairy body like
a live coal, as when, in a lavatory, a human rear end comes out of a pair of
pants—the little girl achieves in such a way that there will be nothing left to do
but stifle a scream. She drifts away, pressed on by a need; she trots in an alley
where her steps make the gravel screech and where she passes her friends with-
out seeing their multicolored balls, which are nevertheless well designed to
attract eyes dazzled by any riot of color. Thus she runs to the foul-smelling place
and locks herself in with surprise, like a young queen who, out of curiosity,
locks herself in the throne room: obscurely, but in ecstasy, she has learned to
recognize the face, the comic breath of death; she is unaware only of her own
sobs of voluptuousness   that will join,    much   later, this miraculous,   sweet dis-
covery   ..

    In the course of the progressive erection that goes from the quadruped to
Homo erectus, the ignominy of animal appearance grows to the point of attaining
horrifying proportions, from the pretty and almost baroque lemur, who still
moves on the horizontal plane, up to the gorilla. However, when the line of
terminal evolution is directed toward the human being, the series of forms 1s
produced, on the contrary, in the direction of a more and more noble or correct
regularity. Thus at the present stage of development the automatic rectitude of
a soldier in uniform, maneuvering according to orders, emerges from the
immense confusion of the animal world and proposes itself to the universe of
astronomy as its highest achievement. If, on the other hand, this mathematical
military truth is contrasted with the excremental orifice of the ape, which seems
to be its inevitable compensation, the universe that seemed menaced by human
splendor in a pitifully imperative form receives no other response than the
unintelligible discharge of a burst of laughter . . .
                                88 L) THE PINEAL EYE


   When the arboreal life of apes, moving in jerks from branch to branch, pro-
voked the rupture of the equilibrium that resulted from rectilinear locomotion,
everything that obscurely but ceaselessly sought to throw itself outside the
animal organism was freely discharged into the region of the inferior orifice.
This part, which had never been developed, and was hidden under the tails of
other animals, sent out shoots and flowered in the ape; it turned into a bald pro-
tuberance and the most beautiful colors of nature made it dazzling. The tail, for
a long time incapable of hiding this immense hernia of flesh, disappeared from
the most evolved apes, those that carried on the genius of their species, in such
a way that the hernia was able to blossom, at the end of the process, with the
most hideous obscenity.
    Thus the disappearance of the free caudal appendage with which, more than
anything else, human pride is commonly associated, in no way signifies a regres-
sion of original bestiality, but rather a liberation of lubricious and absolutely dis-
gusting anal forces, of which man is only the contradictory expression.
    The earth, shaken to its foundations, answered this doubtful colic of nature—
discharged, in the gluey penumbra of forests, through numberless flowers of
flesh—with the noisy joy of entrails, with the vomiting of unbelievable vol-
canoes. In the same way that a burst of laughter provokes others, or a yawn
provokes the yawns of a crowd, a burlesque fecal spasm had unleashed, under
a black sky ravaged with thunder, a spasm of fire. In this wonderland, a wind,
heavy with bloody smoke, broke down from time to time immense glowing
trees, while tortuous rivers of red incandescent lava streamed from everywhere,
as if from the sky. Victims of an insane terror, the giant apes fled, their flesh
broiled, their mouths distorted by puerile screams.
    Many of them were felled by fiery tree trunks, which laid them down,
screaming, on their stomachs or backs; they soon caught fire and burned like
wood. Occasionally, however, a few arrived on a treeless beach, spared by the
fire, protected from the smoke by an opposing wind: they were nothing more
than breathless lacerations, shapeless silhouettes, half eaten by fire, getting up
or moaning on the ground, staggered by intolerable pain. Before a spectacle of
red lava—as dazzling as a nightmare—of an apocalyptic lava that seemed to
come bloody out of their own anuses (just as, originally, their own hairy bodies
had thrust out and sadistically exhibited these vile anuses—as if all the more to
insult and soil that which exists) these unfortunate creatures became like the
wombs of women who give birth, something horrible .

   It 1s easy, starting with the worm, to consider ironically an animal, a fish,
a monkey, a man, as a tube with two orifices, anal and buccal: the nostrils, the
eyes, the ears, the brain represent the complications of the buccal orifice; the
penis, the testicles, or the female organs that correspond to them, are the compli-
                                THE   PINEAL   EYE   J   89


cation of the anal. In these conditions, the violent thrusts that come from the
interior of the body can be indifferently rejected to one extremity or the other,
and they are discharged, in fact, where they meet the weakest resistance. All
the ornaments of the head, of whatever type, mean the generalized privilege of
the oral extremity; one can only contrast them with the decorative riches of the
excremental extremity of apes.
    But when the great anthropoid carcass found itself standing on the ground,
no longer swinging from one tree to another, itself now perfectly straight and
parallel to a tree, all the impulses that had up to that time found their point of
free expulsion in the anal region ran up against a new barrier. Because of the
erect posture, the anal region ceased to form a protuberance, and it lost the
“‘privileged power of points’’: the erection could only be maintained on condi-
tion that a barrier of contracted muscles be regularly substituted for this ‘‘power
of points.”’ Thus the obscure vital thrusts were suddenly thrown back in the
direction of the face and the cervical region: they were discharged in the human
voice and in more and more fragile intellectual constructions (these new modes
of discharge were not only adapted to the principle of the new structure, to the
erection, but they even contributed to its rigidity and strength).
    Beyond this, in order to consume an excess, the facial extremity assumed a
part—relatively weak, but significant—of the excretory functions that up to that
time had been routed     in the opposite direction:      men   spit, cough,   yawn,   belch,
blow their noses, sneeze, and cry much         more than the other animals, but above
all they have acquired the strange faculty of sobbing and bursting into laughter.
    Alone, even though it may be substituted at the end of evolution for the mouth
as the extreme point of the upper edifice, the pineal gland remains only in a vir-
tual state and can only attain its meaning (without which a man spontaneously
enslaves himself and reduces himself to the status of an employee) with the help
of mythical confusion, as if better to make human nature a value foreign to its
own reality, and thus to tie it to a spectral existence.
    It 1s in relation to this last fact that the metamorphosis of the great ape must
be seen as an inversion, having as its object not only the direction of the dis-
charges thrust back through the head—transforming the head into something
completely different from a mouth, making it a kind of flower blossoming with
the most delirious richness of forms—but also the access of living nature (up to
that point tied to the ground) to the unreality of solar space.
   It 1s the inversion   of the anal orifice itself, resulting     from   the shift from   a
squatting posture to a standing one, that is responsible for the decisive reversal
of animal existence.
   The bald summit of the anus has become the center, blackened with bushes,
of the narrow ravine cleaving the buttocks.
   The spectral image of this change of sign is represented by a strange human
                             90 OO THE PINEAL EYE

nudity—now obscene—that is substituted for the hairy body of animals, and in
particular by the pubescent hairs that appear exactly where the ape was glabrous;
surrounded by a halo of death, a creature who 1s too pale and too large stands
up, a creature who, under a sick sun, is nothing other than the celestial eye it
lacks.
The Use Value of D. A. F. de Sade
(An Open Letter to My
Current Comrades)




If I think it good to address this letter to my comrades, it is not because the prop-
ositions that it contains concern them. It will probably even appear to them that
such propositions do not concern anyone in particular at all. But in this case I
need to have at least a few people as witnesses to establish so complete a defec-
tion. There are, perhaps, declarations which, for lack of anything better, ridicu-
lously need an Attic chorus, because they suppose, as their effect, in spite of
everything, a minimum of astonishment, of misunderstanding, or of repug-
 nance. But one does not address a chorus in order to convince it or rally it, and
certainly one does not submit to the judgment of destiny without revolting, when
 it condemns the declarant to the saddest isolation.
     This isolation, as far as I am concerned, is moreover in part voluntary, since
I would agree to come out of it only on certain hard-to-meet conditions.
   In fact even the gesture of writing, which alone permits one to envisage
slightly less conventional human relations, a little less crafty than those of so-
called intimate friendships—even this gesture of writing does not leave me with
an appreciable hope. I doubt that it is possible to reach the few people to whom
this letter is no doubt intended, over the heads of my present comrades. For—my
resolution is all the more intransigent in that it is absurd to defend—it would
have been necessary to deal not with individuals like those I already know, but
only with men (and above all with masses) who are comparatively decomposed,
amorphous, and even violently expelled from every form. But it is likely that
such men do not yet exist (and the masses certainly do not exist).

                                         91
                    92 ) THE USE VALUE OF D. A. F. DE SADE

     All I can state is that, one day or another, they certainly will not fail to exist,
given that current social bonds will inevitably be undone, and that these bonds
cannot much longer maintain the habitual enslavement of people and customs.
The masses will in turn be decomposed as soon as they see the prestige of indus-
trial reality, to which they find themselves attached, disappear; in other words,
when the process of material progress and rapid transformation in which they
have had to participate (docile as well as in revolt) leads to a disagreeable and
terminal stagnation.
     My resolution thus cannot be defended only in that it eliminates—not without
bitterness—every immediate satisfaction.
     Outside of propositions that can only take on meaning through very general
consequences, it so happens that it is high time for me to quell—at little cost—a
part of this bitterness: it is possible at the very least to clear the narrow terrain—
where from now on the debate will be carried out—of the intellectual bartering
that usually goes on there. In fact it is obvious that if men incapable of histrionics
succeed those of today, they will not be able to better represent the tacky phrase-
ology now in circulation than by recalling the fate reserved, by a certain number
of writers, for the memory of D. A. F. de Sade (moreover it will, perhaps,
appear fairly quickly, in a very general way, that the fact of needlessly resorting
to literary or poetic verbiage, the inability to express oneself in a simple and
categorical way, not only are the result of a vulgar impotence, but always betray
a pretentious hypocrisy).
     Of course, I do not allude in this way to the various people who are scanda-
lized by the writings of Sade, but only to his most open apologists. It has seemed
fitting today to place these writings (and with them the figure of their author)
above everything (or almost everything) that can be opposed to them, but it is
out of the question to allow them the least place in private or public life, in
theory or in practice. The behavior of Sade’s admirers resembles that of primi-
tive subjects in relation to their king, whom they adore and loathe, and whom
they cover with honors and narrowly confine.        In the most favorable cases, the
author of Justine is in fact thus treated as any given foreign body; in other words,
he is only an object of transports of exaltation to the extent that these transports
facilitate his excretion (his peremptory expulsion).
    The life and works of D. A. F. de Sade would thus have no other use value
than the common use value of excrement; in other words, for the most part, one
most often only loves the rapid (and violent) pleasure of voiding this matter and
no longer seeing it.
    I am thus led to indicate how, in a way completely different from this usage,
the sadism which is not completely different from that which existed before Sade
appears positively, on the one hand, as an irruption of excremental forces (the
excessive violation of modesty, positive algolagnia, the violent excretion of the
scxual object coinciding with a powerful or tortured ejaculation, the libidinal
                     THE    USE   VALUE     OF D. A. F. DE SADE     U    93


interest in cadavers,      vomiting,     defecation   . . . )—and       on the other as a cor-
responding limitation, a narrow enslavement of everything that 1s opposed to this
irruption. Ît is only in these concrete conditions that sad social necessity, human
dignity, fatherland and family, as well as poetic sentiments, appear without a
mask and without any play of light and shadow; it is finally impossible to see
in those things anything other than subordinate forces: so many slaves working
like cowards to prepare the beautiful blustering eruptions that alone are capable
of answering the needs that torment the bowels of most men.
     But, given that Sade revealed his conception of terrestrial life in the most out-
rageous form (even given that it is not possible to reveal immediately such a con-
ception other than in a terrifying and inadmissible form), it is perhaps not sur-
prising that people have believed it possible to get beyond its reach. Literary
men apparently have the best reason for not confirming a brilliant verbal and
low-cost apology through practice. They could even pretend that Sade was the
first to take the trouble to situate the domain he described outside of and above
all reality. They could easily affirm that the brilliant and suffocating value he
wanted   to give human       existence     is inconceivable   outside of fiction,    that only
poetry, exempt from all practical applications, permits one to have at his dis-
posal, to a certain extent, the brilliance and suffocation that the Marquis de Sade
tried so indecently to provoke.
    It is right to recognize that, even practiced in the extremely implicit form it
has retained up to this point, such a diversion discredits its authors (at the very
least among those—even if, moreover, they are horrified by sadism—who refuse
to become interested, for bad as well as for good reasons, in simple verbal
prestidigitation).
   The fact remains, unfortunately, that this diversion has been practiced for so
long without denunciation, under cover of a fairly poor phraseology, simply
because it takes place in an area where, it seems, everything slips away. . . . It
is no doubt almost useless at the present time to set forth rational propositions,
since they could only be taken up for the profit of some convenient and—even
in an apocalyptic guise—thoroughly literary enterprise: in other words, on the
condition that they be useful for ambitions calculated by the impotence of
present-day man. The slightest hope, in fact, involves the destruction (the dis-
appearance) of a society that has so ridiculously allowed the one who conceives
that hope to exist.
    The time has no less come, it seems to me—under the indifferent eyes of my
comrades—to bet on a future that has, it is true, only an unfortunate, hallucina-
tory existence. At the very least the plan I think possible to sketch intellectually
today of what will really exist later is the only thing that links the various pre-
liminary propositions that follow to a still sickly will to agitation.
    For the moment, an abrupt statement not followed by explanations seems to
me to respond sufficiently to the intellectual disorientation of those who could
                     94 [] THE    USE   VALUE    OF D. A. F. DE SADE


have the opportunity to become aware of it. And (even though I am capable to
a large extent of doing it now) I put off until later difficult and interminable ex-
plications, analogous to those of any other elaborated theory. At this point then
I will set forth the propositions that, among other things, allow one to introduce
the values established by the Marquis de Sade, obviously not in the domain of
gratuitous impertinence, but rather directly in the very market in which, each
day, the credit that individuals and even communities can give to their own lives
is, In a Way, registered.


                           Appropriation and Excretion
    1. The division of social facts into religious facts (prohibitions, obligations,
and the realization of sacred action) on the one hand and profane facts (civil,
political, juridical, industrial, and commercial organization) on the other, even
though it is not easily applied to primitive societies and lends itself in general
to a certain number of confusions, can nevertheless serve as the basis for the
determination of two polarized human impulses: EXCRETION and APPRO-
PRIATION. In other words, during a period in which the religious organization
of a given country is developing, this organization represents the freest opening
for excremental collective impulses (orgiastic impulses) established in opposi-
tion to political, juridical, and economic institutions.

   2.   Sexual activity, whether perverted or not; the behavior of one sex before
the other; defecation; urination; death and the cult of cadavers (above all, insofar
as it involves the stinking decomposition of bodies); the different taboos; ritual
cannibalism; the sacrifice of animal-gods; omophagia; the laughter of exclusion;
sobbing (which in general has death as its object); religious ecstasy; the identical
attitude toward   shit, gods,    and cadavers;    the terror that so often accompanies
involuntary defecation; the custom of making women both brilliant and lubri-
cious with makeup, gems, and gleaming jewels; gambling; heedless expenditure
and certain fanciful uses of money, etc. together present a common character
in that the object of the activity (excrement, shameful parts, cadavers, etc.) is
found each time treated as a foreign body (daz ganz Anderes); in other words,
it can just as well be expelled following a brutal rupture as reabsorbed through
the desire to put one’s body and mind entirely in a more or less violent state of
expulsion (or projection). The notion of the (heterogeneous) foreign body per-
mits one to note the elementary subjective identity between types of excrement
(sperm, mentrual blood, urine, fecal matter) and everything that can be seen as
sacred, divine, or marvelous: a half-decomposed cadaver fleeing through the
night in a luminous shroud can be seen as characteristic of this unity.

   3.   The process of simple appropriation is normally presented within the pro-
                    THE   USE   VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE   0 95


cess of composite excretion, insofar as it is necessary for the production of an
alternating rhythm, for example, in the following passage from Sade:

   Verneuil makes someone shit, he eats the turd, and then he demands that
someone eat his. The one who eats his shit vomits; he devours her puke.

   The elementary form of appropriation is oral consumption, considered as
communion (participation, identification, incorporation, or assimilation). Con-
sumption is either sacramental (sacrificial) or not depending on whether the
heterogeneous character of food is heightened or conventionally destroyed. In
the latter case,   the identification takes place first in the preparation of foods,
which must be given an appearance of striking homogeneity, based on strict con-
ventions. Eating as such then intervenes in the process as a complex phenome-
non in that the very fact of swallowing presents itself as a partial rupture of
physical equilibrium and is accompanied by, among other things, a sudden liber-
ation of great quantities of saliva. Nevertheless, the element of appropriation,
in moderate and rational form,      in fact dominates,   because cases in which eat-
ing’s principal goal is physiological tumult (gluttony or drunkenness followed
by vomiting) are no doubt unusual.
    The process of appropriation is thus characterized by a homogeneity (static
equilibrium) of the author of the appropriation, and of objects as final result,
whereas excretion presents itself as the result of a heterogeneity, and can move
in the direction of an ever greater heterogeneity, liberating impulses whose
ambivalence is more and more pronounced. The latter case is represented by,
for example, sacrificial consumption in the elementary form of the orgy, which
has no other goal than the incorporation in the person of irreducibly hetero-
geneous elements,     insofar as such elements risk provoking an increase of force
(or more exactly an increase of mana).

    4. Man does not only appropriate his food, but also the different products
of his activity: clothes, furniture, dwellings, and instruments of production.
Finally, he appropriates land divided into parcels. Such appropriations take
place by means of a more or less conventional homogeneity (identity) estab-
lished between the possessor and the object possessed. It involves sometimes a
personal homogeneity that in primitive times could only be solemnly destroyed
with the aid of an excretory rite, and sometimes a general homogeneity, such
as that established by the architect between a city and its inhabitants.
    In this respect, production can be seen as the excretory phase of a process
of appropriation, and the same is true of selling.

   5.   The homogeneity of the kind realized in cities between men and that
which   surrounds them is only a subsidiary form of a much more consistent
                    96 O   THE   USE   VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE


homogeneity, which man has established throughout the external world by
everywhere replacing a priori inconceivable objects with classified series of
conceptions or ideas. The identification of all the elements of which the world
is composed has been pursued with a constant obstinacy, so that scientific con-
ceptions, as well as the popular conceptions of the world, seem to have voluntar-
ily led to a representation as different from what could have been imagined a
priori as the public square of a capital 1s from a region of high mountains.
    This last appropriation—the work of philosophy as well as of science or
common sense—has included phases of revolt and scandal, but it has always had
as its goal the establishment of the homogeneity of the world, and it will only
be able to lead to a terminal phase in the sense of excretion when the irreducible
waste products of the operation are determined.


        Philosophy, Religion, and Poetry in Relation to Heterology

    6. The interest of philosophy resides in the fact that, in opposition to science
or common sense, it must positively envisage the waste products of intellectual
appropriation. Nevertheless, it most often envisages these waste products only
in abstract forms of totality (nothingness, infinity, the absolute), to which it itself
cannot give a positive content; it can thus freely proceed in speculations that
more or less have as a goal, all things considered, the sufficient identification
of an endless world with a finite world, an unknowable (noumenal) world with
the known (phenomenal) world.
    Only an intellectual elaboration in a religious form can, in its periods of
autonomous development, put forward the waste products of appropriative
thought as the definitively heterogeneous (sacred) object of speculation. But in
general one must take into account the fact that religions bring about a profound
separation within the sacred domain, dividing it into a superior world (celestial
and divine) and an inferior world (demoniacal, a world of decomposition); now
such a division necessarily leads to a progressive homogeneity of the entire
superior domain (only the inferior domain resists all efforts at appropriation).
God rapidly and almost entirely loses his terrifying features, his appearance as
a decomposing cadaver, in order to become, at the final stage of degradation,
the simple (paternal) sign of universal homogeneity.

     7. In practice, one must understand by religion not really that which
answers the need for the unlimited projection (expulsion or excretion) of human
nature, but the totality of prohibitions, obligations, and partial freedom that
socially channel and regularize this projection. Religion thus differs from a
practical and theoretical heterology* (even though both are equally concerned
with sacred or excremental facts), not only in that the former excludes the scien-
tific rigor proper to the latter (which generally appears as different from religion
                    THE   USE VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE   (] 97


as chemistry is from alchemy), but also in that, under normal conditions,          it
betrays the needs that it was not only supposed to regulate, but satisfy.

    8. Poetry at first glance seems to remain valuable as a method of mental
projection (in that it permits one to accede to an entirely heterogeneous world).
But it is only too easy to see that it is hardly less debased than religion. It has
almost always been at the mercy of the great historical systems of appropriation.
And insofar as it can be developed autonomously, this autonomy leads it onto
the path of a total poetic conception of the world, which ends at any one of a
number of aesthetic homogeneities. The practical unreality of the heterogeneous
elements it sets in motion is, in fact, an indispensable condition for the continua-
tion of heterogeneity: starting from the moment when this unreality immediately
constitutes itself as a superior reality, whose mission is to eliminate (or degrade)
inferior vulgar reality, poetry is reduced to playing the role of the standard of
things, and, in opposition, the worst vulgarity takes on an ever stronger excre-
mental value.


                   The Heterological Theory of Knowledge

    9. When one says that heterology scientifically considers questions of het-
erogeneity, one does not mean that heterology is, in the usual sense of such a
formula, the science of the heterogeneous. The heterogeneous is even resolutely
placed outside the reach of scientific knowledge, which by definition is only
applicable to homogeneous elements. Above all, heterology is opposed to any
homogeneous representation of the world, in other words, to any philosophical
system. The goal of such representations is always the deprivation of our uni-
verse’s sources of excitation and the development of a servile human species,
fit only for the fabrication, rational consumption, and conservation of products.
But the intellectual process automatically limits itself by producing of its own
accord its own waste products, thus liberating in a disordered way the hetero-
geneous excremental element. Heterology is restricted to taking up again, con-
sciously and resolutely, this terminal process which up until now has been seen
as the abortion and the shame of human thought.
    In that way it [heterology] leads to the complete reversal of the philosophical
process, which ceases to be the instrument of appropriation, and now serves
excretion; it introduces the demand for the violent gratifications implied by
social life.

   10.   Only, on the one hand, the process of limitation and, on the other, the
study of the violently alternating reactions of antagonism (expulsion) and love
(reabsorption) obtained by positing the heterogeneous element, lie within the
province of heterology as science. This element itself remains indefinable and
                     98 U   THE   USE   VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE


can only be determined through negation. The specific character of fecal matter
or of the specter, as well as of unlimited time or space, can only be the object
of a series of negations, such as the absence of any possible common denomi-
nator, irrationality, etc. It must even be added that there is no way of placing
such elements in the immediate objective human domain, in the sense that the
pure and simple objectification of their specific character would lead to their
incorporation in a homogeneous intellectual system, in other words, to a hypo-
critical cancellation of their excremental character.
    The objectivity of heterogeneous elements thus is of only purely theoretical
interest, since one can only attain it on the condition that one envisage waste
products in the total form of the infinite obtained by negation (in other words,
objective heterogeneity’s shortcoming is that it can only be envisaged in an
abstract form, whereas the subjective heterogeneity of particular elements is, in
practice,   alone concrete).

     11. Scientific data—in other words, the result of appropriation—alone
retains an immediate and appreciable objective character, since immediate ob-
jectivity is defined by the possibilities of intellectual appropriation. If one de-
fines real exterior objects it is necessary to introduce at the same time the possi-
bility of a relation of scientific appropriation. And if such a relation 1s
impossible, the element envisaged remains in practice unreal, and can only ab-
stractly be made objective. All questions posed beyond this represent the persis-
tence of a dominant need for appropriation, the sickly obstinacy of a will seeking
to represent, in spite of everything, and through simple cowardice, a homogene-
ous and servile world.

    12. It is useless to try to deny that one finds there—much more than in the
difficulty (less embarrassing than facility) met with in the analysis of the process
of excretion and appropriation—the weak point (in practice) of these concep-
tions, for one must generally take into account the unconscious obstinacy fur-
nished by defections and complacency. It would be too easy to find in objective
nature a large number of phenomena that in a crude way correspond to the
human model of excretion and appropriation, in order to attain once again the
notion of the unity of being, for example,        in a dialectical form.   One can attain
it more generally through animals, plants, matter, nature, and being, without
meeting really consistent obstacles. Nevertheless, it can already be indicated that
as one moves away from man, the opposition loses its importance to the point
where it is only a superimposed form that one obviously could not have dis-
covered in the facts considered if it had not been borrowed from a different order
of facts. The only way to resist this dilution lies in the practical part of heter-
ology, which leads to an action that resolutely goes against this regression to
homogeneous nature.
                   THE   USE   VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE   U   99


   As soon as the effort at rational comprehension ends in contradiction, the
practice of intellectual scatology requires the excretion of unassimilable ele-
ments, which is another way of stating vulgarly that a burst of laughter is the
only imaginable and definitively terminal result—and not the means—of philo-
sophical speculation. And then one must indicate that a reaction as insignificant
as a burst of laughter derives from the extremely vague and distant character of
the intellectual domain, and that it suffices to go from a speculation resting on
abstract facts to a practice whose mechanism      is not different, but which imme-
diately reaches concrete heterogeneity, in order to arrive at ecstatic trances and
orgasm.


                         Principles of Practical Heterology
    13. Excretion is not simply a middle term between two appropriations, just
as decay is not simply a middle term between the grain and the ear of wheat.
The inability to consider in this latter case decay as an end in itself is the result
not precisely of the human viewpoint but of the specifically intellectual view-
point (to the extent that this viewpoint is in practice subordinate to a process of
appropriation). The human viewpoint, independent of official declarations, in
other words as it results from, among      other things, the analysis of dreams, on
the contrary represents appropriation as a means of excretion. In the final anal-
ysis it is clear that a worker works in order to obtain the violent pleasures of
coitus (in other words, he accumulates in order to spend). On the other hand,
the conception according to which the worker must have coitus in order to pro-
vide for the future necessities of work 1s linked to the unconscious identification
of the worker with the slave. In fact, to the extent that the various functions are
distributed among the various social categories, appropriation in its most over-
whelming form historically devolves on slaves: thus in the past serfs had to
accumulate products for knights and clerks, who barely took part in the labor
of appropriation, and then only through the establishment of a morality that
regularized for their own profit the circulation of goods. But as soon as one
attacks the accursed exploitation of man by man, it becomes time to leave to the
exploiters this abominable appropriative morality, which for such a long time
has permitted their own orgies of wealth. To the extent that man no longer thinks
of crushing his comrades under the yoke of morality, he acquires the capacity
to link overtly not only his intellect and his virtue but his raison d’étre to the
violence and incongruity of his excretory organs, as well as to his ability to
become excited and entranced by heterogeneous elements, commonly starting
in debauchery.

    14. The need—before being able to go on to radical demands and to the
violent practice of a rigorous moral liberty —to abolish all exploitation of man
                    100 Ü   THE   USE   VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE


by man is not the only motive that links the practical development of heterology
to the overturning of the established order.
    In that they are manifested in a social milieu, the urges that heterology identi-
fies in practice with the raison d'être of man can be seen in a certain sense as
antisocial (to the same degree that sexual corruption or even pleasure is seen by
certain individuals as a waste of strength, like, for example, the great ritual
destructions of goods in British Columbia, or, among civilized peoples, the
pleasure of crowds watching great fires at night). Nevertheless, the impulses that
go against the interests of a society in a state of stagnation (during a phase of
appropriation) have, on the contrary, social revolution (the phase of excretion)
as their end: thus they can find, through the historical movements by means of
which humanity spends its own strength freely and limitlessly, both total gratifi-
cation and use in the very sense of general conscious benefit. Besides, whatever,
the reality of this ulterior benefit might be, it is no less true that if one considers
the submerged masses, doomed to an obscure and impotent life, the revolution
by which these masses liberate force with a long-restrained violence is as much
the practical raison d'être of societies as it is their means of development.

    15. Of course the term excretion applied to the Revolution must first be
understood in the strictly mechanical—and moreover etymological—sense of the
word. The first phase of a revolution is separation, in other words, a process
leading to the position of two groups of forces, each one characterized by the
necessity of excluding the other. The second phase is the violent expulsion of
the group that has possessed power by the revolutionary group.
    But one also notes that each of the groups, by its very constitution, gives the
opposing group an almost exclusively negative excremental character, and it is
only because of this negativity that the sacrificial character of a revolution re-
mains profoundly unconscious. The revolutionary impulse of the proletarian
masses is, moreover, sometimes implicitly and sometimes openly treated as
sacred, and that is why it is possible to use the word Revolution entirely stripped
of its utilitarian meaning without, however, giving it an idealist meaning.

    16. Participation—in the purely psychological sense as well as in the active
sense of the word—does not only commit revolutionaries to a particular politics,
for example, to the establishment of socialism throughout the world. It is also—
and necessarily—presented as moral participation: immediate participation in
the destructive action of the revolution (expulsion realized through the total
shattering of the equilibrium of the social edifice), indirect participation in all
equivalent destructive action. It is the very character of the revolutionary will
to link such actions—not, as in the Christian apocalypse, to punishment—but to
the enjoyment or the utility of human beings, and it 1s obvious that all destruction
that is neither useful nor inevitable can only be the achievement of an exploiter
                   THE   USE   VALUE   OF D. A. F. DE SADE   U   101


and, consequently, of morality as the principle of all exploitation.* But then 1t
is easy to ascertain that the reality of such participation is at the very basis of
the separation of the socialist parties, divided into reformists and revolu-
tionaries.
    Without a profound complicity with natural forces such as violent death,
gushing blood, sudden catastrophes and the horrible cries of pain that accom-
pany them, terrifying ruptures of what had seemed to be immutable, the fall into
stinking filth of what had been elevated—without a sadistic understanding of an
incontestably thundering and torrential nature, there could be no revolutionaries,
there could only be a revolting utopian sentimentality.

    17. The participation in everything that, among men, is horrible and al-
legedly sacred can take place in a limited and unconscious form, but this limita-
tion and this unconsciousness obviously have only a provisional value, and
nothing can stop the movement that leads human beings toward an ever more
shameless awareness of the erotic bond that links them to death, to cadavers,
and to horrible physical pain. It is high time that human nature cease being sub-
jected to the autocrat’s vile repression and to the morality that authorizes exploi-
tation. Since it is true that one of a man’s attributes is the derivation of pleasure
from the suffering of others, and that erotic pleasure is not only the negation of
an agony that takes place at the same instant, but also a lubricious participation
in that agony, it is time to choose between the conduct of cowards afraid of their
own joyful excesses, and the conduct of those who judge that any given man
need not cower like a hunted animal, but instead can see all the moralistic buf-
foons as so many dogs.

    18. As a result of these elementary considerations, it is necessary from now
on to envisage two distinct phases in human emancipation, as undertaken succes-
sively by the different revolutionary surges, from Jacobinism to bolshevism.
    During the revolutionary phase, the current phase that will only end with the
world triumph of socialism, only the social Revolution can serve as an outlet for
collective impulses, and no other activity can be envisaged in practice.
    But the postrevolutionary phase implies the necessity of a division between
the economic and political organization of society on one hand, and on the other,
an antireligious and asocial organization having as its goal orgiastic participation
in different forms of destruction, in other words, the collective satisfaction of
needs that correspond to the necessity of provoking the violent excitation that
results from the expulsion of heterogeneous elements.
    Such an organization can have no other conception of morality than the one
scandalously affirmed for the first time by the Marquis de Sade.

   19.   When it is a question of the means of realizing this orgiastic participa-
                       102 [J THE    USE   VALUE    OF   D. A. F. DE SADE


tion, [such] an organization will find itself as close to religions anterior to the
formations of autocratic States as it is distant from religions such as Christianity
or Buddhism.
   One    must broadly take into account,           in such a forecast,       the probable     inter-
vention of blacks in the general culture. To the extent that blacks participate in
revolutionary emancipation, the attainment of socialism will bring them the pos-
sibility of all kinds of exchanges with white people, but in conditions radically
different from those currently experienced by the civilized blacks of America.
Now black communities, once liberated from all superstition as from all oppres-
sion, represent in relation to heterology not only the possibility but the necessity
of an adequate organization. All organizations that have ecstasy and frenzy as
their goal (the spectacular death of animals, partial tortures, orgiastic dances,
etc.) will have no reason to disappear when a heterological conception of human
life is substituted for the primitive conception; they can only transform them-
selves while they spread, under the violent impetus of a moral doctrine of white
origin, taught to blacks by all those whites who have become aware of the
abominable inhibitions paralyzing their race’s communities. It is only starting
from this collusion of European scientific theory with black practice that institu-
tions can develop which will serve as the final outlets (with no other limitations
than those of human strength) for the urges that today require worldwide soci-
ety’s fiery and bloody Revolution.

                                                Notes

      !. The identical nature, from the psychological point of view, of God and excrement should
not shock the intellect of anyone familiar with the problems posed by the history of religions. The
cadaver is not much more repugnant than shit, and the specter that projects its horror is sacred even
in the eyes of modern theologians. The following passage from Frazer very nearly sums up the basic
historical aspect of the question: ‘“ . . . These different categories of people differ, in our eyes,
by virtue of their character and their condition: we should say that one group is sacred, the other
filthy or impure. This is not the case for the savage, for his mind is much too crude to understand
clearly what a sacred being is, and what an impure being is.”’
      2. The science of what is completely other. The term agiology would perhaps be more precise,
but one would have to catch the double meaning of agio (analogous to the double meaning of sacer),
soiled as well as holy. But it is above all the term scatology (the science of excrement) that retains
in the present circumstances (the specialization of the sacred) an incontestable expressive value as
the doublet of an abstract term such as heterology.
      3. For example, imperialist war.
Il
(1932-1935)
The Critique of the Foundations
of the Hegelian Dialectic




The Marxist conception of the dialectic has often been challenged. Finally, Max
Eastman considered it to be a form of religious thought. But the dialectic has
only been the object of a negative critique. Those who criticized it acted as sim-
ple destroyers. They tried not to see that, by removing the dialectical method
from proletarian ideology, they removed the blood from the body; they took no
notice of that because Hegelianism, in whatever form it might take, was incom-
patible with their ordinary conceptions. Thus the Marxist dialectic was treated
in the same way that the Hegelian dialectic in general was treated: it was pushed
away with repugnance.
    A new way of conceiving the Hegelian dialectic nevertheless starts with the
critique of Nicolai Hartmann,' in which it is possible to find the elements of a
true positive critique. The indications given by this German professor, in an
article appearing in the Revue de métaphysique et de morale,* are sufficient in
themselves: they express in concise form a direction that is, in our opinion, of
the greatest interest to Marxist studies. Hartmann successively examines the dif-
ferent dialectical themes developed in Hegel’s philosophy, and then compares
them from the standpoint of their bases and forms. In this way he seeks to distin-
guish those that are justified by experience, founded in reality, from those that
have only a verbal value. As an example of the latter he cites the famous theme
of being and nothingness. ‘‘In the course of such an investigation,”’ states
Hartmann, ‘‘Hegel’s Logic most seriously gives rise to the suspicion that, in its
major part, it consists only ofa dialectic lacking any foundation in reality. This

                                        10S
                                  106 O CRITIQUE

is even more true,’’ he adds, ‘‘in the Philosophy of Nature (this is obvious, it
is true, and not unprecedented,    as results already confirm).’”*

   The profound difference between Hartmann’s critique and the Marxist cri-
tique appears at the outset. For Marx and Engels, the dialectic is still—as it is
for Hegel—the general law of a fundamental reality. Nature or matter has been
substituted for logic, but the universe is nevertheless abandoned in its entirety
to antithetical development. For Hartmann, on the other hand, the basic task lies
in methodically testing the value of dialectical reasoning in its particular cases.
And not only is universality set aside, but from the outset, more than any other
element, nature is seen as a prohibited domain. The dialectical themes justified
by Hartmann are borrowed neither from the Logic nor from the Philosophy of
Nature, but from the Philosophy of Right, the Philosophy of History, and the
Phenomenology of Spirit; and the first example Hartmann gives to found his con-
ception has nothing to do with the grain of barley or with geological formations.
It is, on the contrary, class struggle itself, the Hegelian theme of ‘‘master and
slave.”” Thus a modern philosopher, wanting to found the dialectic in reality,
immediately refers to the Marxist experience.*

    One must recognize in any case that Marx and Engels themselves felt the
necessity of a labor analogous—but only in its elementary principle—to the one
that Hartmann has recently undertaken. The fact that they chose a domain of
study different from that of Hartmann, that they had the ambition to give dialec-
tical conceptions the character of general laws of nature in no way contradicts
the fact that Engels tried, through a long study of the natural sciences, to give
these laws an experimental value. But from the beginning we are led to differen-
tiate between the domain admitted a posteriori by Hartmann and the one that
Engels assigned himself a priori. Hartmann methodically seeks to recognize
what, in the dialectical themes, can be seen as givens of lived experience,
whereas Engels systematically imposed on himself the task of finding these laws
in nature, in other words, in a domain that can at first appear to be closed to
all antithetically developing rational conceptions.
     Hartmann’s attitude of indifference toward the Philosophy of Nature con-
forms to that of all the representatives of the natural sciences since Hegel. For
scientists, a dialectical construction of the relations they study must seem incom-
patible with science: science must do as much as possible without the interven-
tion of an element that is as foreign to it as is systematic contradiction—and in
fact it was possible to do without it. The objection to the introduction of the di-
alectic was of a necessity so apparent to specialists that it was not even necessary
to formulate it.
    But the difficulty offered by nature to the dialectic is not only indicated by
the history of all modern scientific research: Hegel himself was the first to indi-
                                   CRITIQUE   O   107


cate cautiously that it was precisely nature which by its ‘‘impotence [ . . . to
adhere strictly to the Notion . . . ] sets limits to philosophy.’’® To philosophy:
in other words, to the dialectical construction of the becoming of things. For
him, nature is the fall of the idea; it is a negation, at the same time a revolt and
an absurdity.
   Even if he had set aside his idealist prejudices, nothing would have seemed
more unreasonable to Hegel than looking for the foundations of the objectivity
of dialectical laws in the study of nature. This effort would in fact lead again
to basing the dialectical construction on its weakest part; it would lead to the
paradox of the colossus with feet of clay. The very elements that suddenly be-
come, for Marx and Engels, the method’s foundations are precisely those that
offer the most resistance to the application of this method, and not only by defi-
nition, but above all in practice. In spite of the trouble taken by Hegel to resolve
the difficulties encountered in the Philosophy of Nature, this part of his work
left even him unsatisfied. It must be recognized in principle that difficulties of
this kind do not in any way permit Engels’s efforts to be considered inherently
untenable.   Nevertheless,   in fact, the failure of this effort was,   in a way, given
in its premises. The substitution of nature for logic is only the Scylla and
Charybdis of post-Hegelian philosophy.
    Today a new experimental justification of the dialectic has become necessary.
It will be clear why this operation can only take place on the very terrain of its
specific development, in other words on the immediate terrain of class struggle,
in experience and not in an a priori fog of universal conceptions.

    The failure of Engels, who worked for eight years preparing a dialectical
theory of nature—which led only to the second preface of the Anti-Dühring® in
 1885—has not yet been the object of the studies that the considerable efforts of
this great pioneer of the Revolution so richly deserve. Many people prefer to
speak of dialectical materialism as if it were not an incomplete project, but a con-
stituted doctrine.” This carelessness is even more unjustifiable in that Engels’s
abandonment of the project was due neither to a lack of time, nor to any other
circumstances external to the nature of the project itself. Engels invokes the
death of Marx and the need to work on the edition of his friend’s uncompleted
works. He nevertheless wrote this second preface in which—after recognizing
the insufficiency of the arguments in the Anti-Dühring that have to do with the
dialectic—he gives a definition of the dialectic that 1s nothing more than an aban-
donment of his initial position. The immense and admirable effort of Engels,
which we know of today due to the publications of Riazanov, therefore had this
result: the change represented by the second preface in relation to the main text
of the Anti-Dühring. This step backwards in itself accounts for the fact that
Engels left unfinished a work to which, by his own account, he devoted the
better part of eight years.
                                    108 O CRITIQUE


    One still finds in 1881-82, in a note published by Riazanov,® an affirmation
of the most suspect form of the dialectical conception. The ‘‘law’’ of the nega-
tion of the negation is cited there as one of the three essential dialectical laws
of the history of nature. Nevertheless, the argument that follows stops at the
transformation of quality into quantity.’ No examples are given of the ‘‘negation
of the negation.’’ By 1885 this ‘‘negation of the negation’’ has disappeared from
an account meant to remedy the insufficiencies of the Anti-Dühring, published
in 1878.
    It would, however, be easy to agree on this point: if any part of the Anti-
Dühring can be criticized, it is the one that presents examples of the ‘‘negation
of the negation’’; the stories of grains of barley, butterflies, and geological
strata. The insufficiency of this section is even more regrettable in that without
this ‘“negation of the negation’’ the dialectic loses its practical value in the realm
of society. Nevertheless, instead of returning to this burning question, Engels
in 1885 stops seeing the ‘“negation of the negation’’ in the ‘‘essential of the di-
alectical conception of nature.’’ The relevant passage from the second preface
should be cited here in its entirety.
   It is however precisely the polar antagonisms put forward as irrecon-
   cilable and insoluble, the forcibly fixed lines of demarcation and class
   distinctions, that have given modern theoretical natural science its re-
   stricted, metaphysical character. The recognition that these antagonisms
   and distinctions,   though   to be found   in nature,   are only of relative
   validity, and that on the other hand their imagined rigidity and abso-
   lute validity have been introduced into nature only by our reflective
   minds—this recognition is the kernel*® of the dialectical conception of
   nature.'’

    This declaration means nothing less than the renunciation of the hope of
founding in nature the general law of which class struggle would only have been
a particular case.
    To link facts as different as the transformation of electricity into heat (or any
other change in nature) and class struggle in fact makes no sense—and in fact
no practical sense. Class struggle, which we cite as our most important example,
is characterized first of all by the fact that the positive term, capitalism, neces-
sarily implies the negative term, the proletariat; secondly, the realization of the
negation implied in the second term implies, in turn, and with the same neces-
sity, the negation of the negation (in this way the revolution has, at the same
time, a negative and a positive sense). In other applications, this elementary
schema can be altered; as Hartmann explains it,'? dialectical themes can take a
great number of forms, each one very different—but it is possible to admit such
alteration while nevertheless refusing to recognize that this schema is the same
when it reappears in a form so impoverished that one cannot imagine a greater
                                 CRITIQUE O 109

impoverishment. If it is only a matter of recognizing diversity in identity, or
identity in diversity, if it is only a matter of admitting that what is diversified
does not necessarily remain identical to itself, then it is useless and even impru-
dent to invoke the authority of the Hegelian dialectic. For this dialectic is linked
to a current of thought whose ‘‘long experimental history’’ is not exactly what
Engels envisages when using this expression. Things must be looked at squarely,
and it is necessary to admit that the dialectic had antecedents other than Hera-
clitus, Plato, or Fichte. It is linked even more essentially to currents of thought
such as Gnosticism, Neoplatonic mysticism, and to philosophical phantoms such
as Meister Eckhart, the Cardinal Nicholas of Cusa, and Jakob Boehme. Now it
1s no surprise that the thought of these phantoms as assimilated and adopted by
Hegel 1s not applicable to the domain of natural science, or that if this thought
seeks to wander in this domain, it only finds a place as a parasite, becoming ever
poorer and finding itself reduced to the most miserable state. In fact, however,
the same thought, conserved in its richest form, is adequate and, to a certain
extent, alone is adequate, when it is a matter of representing the life and revolu-
tions of societies.
    But in order to conserve this adequacy, this thought must be conserved in its
entirety, whatever its religious antecedents may have been. A justification of its
attenuated form, based on the natural sciences, has revealed itself to be an insuf-
ficient effort, leaving the way open to analytical work established on the bases
defined by Hartmann.
    There remains the strangest element of Engels’ Weltanschauung, his dialec-
tical conception of mathematics,'* which in certain ways recalls the mathemat-
ical idealism of Nicholas of Cusa, whom we have just cited as one of the mys-
tical ancestors of the Hegelian dialectic.
     Engels cannot be suspected of mathematical idealism, but his conception is
even more strange in that it only differs from mathematical idealism to the extent
that mathematics 1s assimilated to nature. This confusion is apparent in the fol-
lowing passage, which appears in the second preface to the Anti-Dühring (p.
cvii; English translation, p. 17):

   It goes without saying that my recapitulation of mathematics and the
   natural sciences was undertaken in order to convince myself also in
   detail—of what in general I was not in doubt—that in nature,'* amid
   the welter of innumerable changes, the same dialectical laws of motion
   [govern].

Beyond this, he gives mathematical examples of the negation of the negation that
come from the history of geological movements and the history of the modes
of property.
   In any case, Engels saw in mathematics a kind of privileged domain of the
conceptions he was trying to introduce: in this domain the dialectic had not only
                                   110 [0 CRITIQUE


the most legitimate place, but the most privileged one as well. Mathematics
furnished the convincing example of a science that had arrived at the dialectical
stage.
    For this reason it is all the more important to indicate here that this science
rejected in its very development everything that could give rise to such an inter-
pretation. What Engels considered a progress toward perfection'® was con-
sidered by mathematicians a degeneration and an evil that had to be eliminated.
[In its origins, infinitesimal calculus was in fact based on ‘‘contradictory’’ no-
tions, and the demonstrations that were available were, in the words of Engels,
‘“‘false from the point of view of elementary mathematics.”” Throughout the
eighteenth century people worked without worrying about the logical difficulties
presented by the use of the infinitely small, the passage to the limit, continuity,
etc. ‘“The simple question of proof 1s definitely pushed into the background, as
compared with the manifold application of the method to new spheres of
research.’’'® But this sentence, which Engels put in the present tense, applied,
in fact, only to a stage of analysis that had already been superseded. From the
beginning of the nineteenth century, mathematicians such as Gauss, Abel, and
Cauchy worked to give their demonstrations an absolute rigor and tried to re-
vise, from this point of view, the demonstrations of their predecessors. Their
successors continued this labor of purification and attacked the very principles
of analysis: the passage to the limit, continuity, differentiation, integration, etc.,
were defined in such a way as to exclude all contradiction. In 1886, Jules
Tannery,'” summing up the mathematical activity of an entire century, could
write:
   One can constitute analysis entirely with the notion of whole numbers
   and notions relative to the addition of whole numbers; it 1s useless to
   invoke any other postulate, or any other experiential given; the notion
   of infinity, which should not be seen as a mystery in mathematics, is
   reducible to this: after each whole number, there is another.

One cannot reproach Engels for his ignorance of the very latest scientific find-
ings of his time, but when he writes of differentials:

   I only mention in passing that this ratio between two quantities that
   have disappeared, caught at the moment of their disappearance, is a
   contradiction; however, it cannot disturb us any more than it has dis-
   turbed the whole of mathematics for almost two hundred years.'®

it is necessary to recognize that this contradiction finally not only troubled
mathematicians, but even scandalized them, that they applied all their efforts to
the task of eliminating it and—it would be vain to deny it—they succeeded.
Today’s analysis is presented with as much logical rigor as arithmetic or alge-
bra. It is true that, even in elementary mathematics, Engels discovered examples
                                  CRITIQUE   O   111


of the negation of the negation or of dialectical thought. We cannot take up each
example here; one can say, in a general way, that Engels’ examples are all based
on a certain ‘“realistic’’ way of interpreting mathematical symbolism and logic.
From the fact that the expression ‘‘first degree curve’’ designates a straight line,
Engels believes it possible that there is identity between straight and curved; but
1s it not evident that the use of the word ‘‘curved’’ in this case is only a con-
vention of language? In the same way, the fact that a root can be a power means
nothing other than this: the sign designating the extraction of a root can be
advantageously replaced by a factional number used as an exponent. Mathemat-
ical symbolism,   translated into everyday   language,   can lead to contradictions;
but these are, one might say, contradictions without reality, pseudocontradic-
tions. A last example: imaginary quantities. Engels says they are in an ‘‘absurd
contradiction . . . areal absurdity,’’'® but a mathematician would say that they
are simply ordered couples of real numbers.
    Thus mathematics—whether higher or not—underwent, during the nineteenth
century, an evolution that in every way was contrary to Engels’s program; it
eliminated every appearance of a dialectic. Rigor in demonstrations, noncontra-
diction in principles, constant accord with logic; those are the ends pursued, and
on the whole attained, by mathematics. One could object, certainly, that new dif-
ficulties reappeared with set theory and that the transfinite could give rise to
developments having the appearance of the dialectic. But the mathematicians’
attitude (their practical effort) toward these new paradoxes is the same as their
attitude toward the old ones: far from seeing them as the result of a superior
mode of thought, they examine them with horror. A new labor of logical reduc-
tion starts. We need mention here only the work of Hilbert and the Polish
school.
    If, in its origins, a mathematical theory can present a certain ‘‘floating’’ in
its principles and can lack rigor in its demonstrations, that is a weakness-isn°t
it superfluous to say?—and not the proof] of the dialectical character of the object
of science. It is true that mathematics is constructed through the denial of the
degeneracies and weaknesses that its development introduces. But quite different
are the completed domain of science and the detours that were necessary in order
for the human mind to arrive at the point where this structure is found. The dia-
lectic does not express the nature of mathematics; it applies to the agent and not
to the object of scientific activity.

    This last remark reintroduces the essential theme of this article. It is not a
question of setting aside dialectical thought; one must instead try to know the
limit beyond which its application in this direction is fruitful. It is useful to con-
sider the following passage of Plekhanov: ‘‘There is not a single ‘moral and
political science,’ as the French call them, that has not undergone the powerful
and fruitful influence of Hegel.’’?° This remark, which expresses the real thrust
                                   112   D) CRITIQUE


given to these sciences by the dialectic and which implies the sterility of this
same method when applied to the natural sciences, coincides with the principles
laid down in Hartmann’s argument, which sought a domain of application for
the dialectic. It is true that Plekhanov did not imagine a limit, but it is important
to note that he recognized in his own way the striking privilege of the moral and
political sciences. This is in any case a vague designation; Hartmann uses the
more Hegelian expression ‘‘sciences of the spirit,”’ which is relatively precise.
But it should be understood that terminology must not prejudice anyone (in the
final analysis) as to the nature of the object in question in a more or less homo-
geneous group of sciences, and furthermore that no precise limitation can be
given in advance.
    The publication of the detailed results of Hartmann’s analysis will furnish the
elements of a more exact labor of determination. This analysis has successively
been applied to each of the numerous dialectical developments that make up the
oeuvre of Hegel, and its preliminary goal has been to separate those develop-
ments representing a lived experience from those that are excrescences of dead
flesh. But it is not necessary to wait for this publication in order to extend the
domain of such investigations to include facts that were not integrated into
Hegel’s philosophy.
    Starting from Hartmann’s method, it is possible to analyze themes posed only
by recent developments of science. And the fact must still be recognized that in
the course of such analyses numerous subsidiary problems will necessarily be
posed. From the outset this new investigation appears as an unlimited task, and
it is even improbable that, starting from a comparable method imposing itself
independently of the more or less open intentions to which, in Hartmann, it may
correspond, the results of the two similar analyses will coincide at labor’s end.

    We will give here a few indications of the possibilities of a long systematic
elaboration, which can lead to a readaptation of general conceptions. The precise
point where introduced dialectical thought starts to express real relations must
be determined in particular cases. For example, no opposition of terms can
account for the biological development of a man who successively is an infant,
an adolescent,   an adult, and an old man.     On the other hand,   if one envisages
the psychological development of the same man from a psychoanalytic point of
view, one can say that the human being 1s first limited by the prohibitions that
the father sets in opposition to his urges. In this precarious condition, he is re-
duced to unconsciously desiring the death of his father. At the same time, the
wishes he directs against paternal power have their repercussions on the son’s
personality; he tries to bring castration down on himself, just as he brings on
himself the shock of his death wishes. In most cases this negativity of the son
does not express the entire real character of his life, which offers at the same
time numerous and contradictory aspects. It is this negativity, however, that
                                 CRITIQUE   U   113


poses as a necessity the son’s taking the place of his father, which he cannot
accomplish without destroying the very negativity that had characterized him up
to this point.
   The importance of this theme comes from the fact that it constitutes an experi-
ence lived by each human being. Through this, the terms of dialectical develop-
ment become elements of real existence.

    Starting from this example we can moreover define the position of a certain
number of problems, whereby it will be possible to indicate the orientation to
which, in our opinion, the introduction of a dialectic of the real could
correspond.
     |. The theme of the father and son allows the demonstration of the fact that
nature has not been left behind and replaced by a truly separate domain. In fact,
the phenomena for which psychoanalysis accounts can be reduced in the final
analysis to drives whose goal is expressed in psychological terms but whose
source 1s of a somatic nature. There is no question here of a matter-spirit dual-
ism; the objects of dialectical investigation represent only the most complex
products of nature. The problem of their specific character can only be honestly
posed if one sets aside from the outset the hateful and vulgar hypothesis of spiri-
tualism, a move authorized precisely by psychoanalysis.
    2. Not only has the domain of nature not been abandoned for phantoms that
would be absolutely heterogenous to it, but the question remains whether a mode
of thought founded neither directly on the study of nature nor on a work of pure
logic but, as in the example we have just seen, on a lived experience—whether
a mode of thought that seems to be directed by the very structure of the one who
thinks is not susceptible to being applied, at least to a certain extent, to the
understanding of nature. The first condition for whoever would attempt this
application would be the awareness of the limits posed by the very origin of the
method, which is another way of saying by the risky character of a hypothesis
according to which the relatively simple forms of nature could be studied by
using given facts furnished by the most complex.
    3. Returning to the realm of practice, a last problem must be posed, which
results from a difference that immediately appears between a method founded
on the natural sciences and a dialectic recognizing its historical origins in lived
experience. In the first, it is not possible to introduce a distinction between the
opposing terms, which can be designated as positive or negative, but which are
neither to the extent that these terms can be used indifferently for one or the
other. Engels makes this observation himself in one of the notes published by
Riazanov.?' Very different are the examples that we consider truly valuable, in
which negativity takes on a specific value. Now it would be easy to show that
as a group the fundamental dialectical themes of the Marxist conception of his-
tory belong to this second category, and that their profound originality, and at
                                          114 O CRITIQUE

the same time their practical importance, consist precisely in the fact that they
introduce into tactics a constant recourse to negative forces or actions, not as
goals but as means demanded by historical development. The study of this
characteristic of the dialectic is all the more important in that, surely, such
methods determine both the suppleness and the power of Marxism, radically
oppose it to reformist solutions,?? and make it the living ideology of the modern
proletariat, as the class condemned by the bourgeoisie to a negative existence,
to the revolutionary activity that constitutes, from now on, the basis for a new
society.

                                                  Notes

     1. À study of this philosopher has appeared in Georges Gurvitch’s Les Tendances actuelles de
la philosophie allemande, Paris, 1930, pp. 187-206.
     2. Hegel et le problème de la dialectique du réel, 1931, pp. 285-316.
     3. Hegel et le problème . . . , p. 307.
     4. Hartmann states: ‘“The influence of the ‘master/slave’ dialectic seems less well known (than
the dialectic of suffering), but its present usefulness 1s even greater, if that 1s possible; it suffices
to recall that the Marxist theory of class struggle came out of it.”’ Revue de métaphysique, 1931,
p. 310.
      S. Encyclopedia, section 250, Remark. [Hegel’s Philosophy of Nature, Part I of the Encyclo-
pedia of the Philosophical Sciences, trans. A. V. Miller (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1970), pp.
23-24. Tr.]
      6. We are following the translation of Laskine (Paris, 1911.) {The English translations here are
from the Anti-Diihring (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1962). Tr.]
      7. Lenin himself wrote of the insufficiency of works representing dialectical materialism: ‘‘The
correctness of this side of the content of dialectics must be tested by the history of science. This side
of dialectics as a rule receives inadequate attention (e. g., Plekhanov); the identity of opposites is
taken as the sum total of examples (‘‘for example, a seed,'’ ‘“‘for example, primitive communism’’).
The same is true of Engels. But with him it is ‘‘in the interests of popularization . . . ' and not
as a law of knowledge (and as a law of the objective world).’’ In **On Dialectics’’ (a text apparently
written between 1912 and 1914), in Materialism and Emperiocriticism [English translation (New
York: International Publishers, 1959), p. 377. Tr.]
      8. Archives Marx-Engels, vol. 11, p. 54.
      9. We will not speak here of the transformation of quantity into quality, a question that merits
an in-depth study, but one that is distinct from the problems that we have wanted to consider in this
article. What becomes of the value of this ‘‘law’’ once it is detached from its a priori justification?
What then is its real meaning? What value should be attributed to the examples given, and to those
that are not given? What are its connections with experimental laws? Can it, in the domain of the
natural sciences, lead to new discoveries? These are methodological problems, which would dernand
a later study.
     10. Our emphasis.
     11. Anti-Diihring, p. cxil. (English translation, p. 21. Tr.]
    12. Revue de métaphysique,      1931, pp. 289-90.
     13. [For Hegel, on the contrary, mathematics is the work of abstract reason (Verstand) and not
of concrete reason (Verniinft), i.e., the dialectical mode of thought.] [The long bracketed passage
in the text, and note 13, were written by Raymond Queneau. Tr.]
     14. Our emphasis.
                                             CRITIQUE       (1     115


   15. Anti-Dühring,        p. 148. [English translation, p. 185. Tr.]
   16. Anti-Dühring, p. 148. [English translation, pp. 185-86. Tr.]
   17. Introduction à la théorie des fonctions, Paris,             1886, p. viii.
   18. Anti-Dühring, p. 172. {English translation, p. 189. Tr.]
   19. Anti-Diihring, p. 148. (English translation, p. 167. Tr.]
   20. La Philosophie de Hegel.
   21. Archives Marx-Engels, 1925, vol. 2, p. 14.
   22.       In     the   Communist     Manifesto,    the        revolutionary      process   is   expressed   by
‘‘measures        . . . that appear economically insufficient and untenable, but that in the course of the
movement, outstrip themselves . . . and are unavoidable as a means of entirely revolutionizing the
mode of production.’’ [English translation, The Communist Manifesto (New York: Monthly Review
Press, 1964), p. 39. Tr.]
The Notion of Expenditure




             I. The Insufficiency of the Principle of Classical Utility

Every time the meaning of a discussion depends on the fundamental value of the
word useful—in other words, every time the essential question touching on the
life of human     societies is raised,   no matter who   intervenes and   what opinions
are expressed  —it is possible to affirm that the debate is necessarily warped and
that the fundamental question is eluded. In fact, given the more or less divergent
collection of present ideas, there is nothing that permits one to define what is
useful to man. This lacuna is made fairly prominent by the fact that it is con-
stantly necessary to return, in the most unjustifiable way, to principles that one
would like to situate beyond utility and pleasure: honor and duty are hypocrit-
ically employed in schemes of pecuniary interest and, without speaking of God,
Spirit serves to mask the intellectual disarray of the few people who refuse to
accept a closed system.
   Current    practice, however,     1s not deterred by these elementary    difficulties,
and common awareness at first seems able to raise only verbal objections to the
principles of classical utility—in other words, to supposedly material utility. The
goal of the latter is, theoretically, pleasure—but only in a moderate form, since
violent pleasure is seen as pathological. On the one hand, this material utility
is limited to acquisition (in practice, to production) and to the conservation of
goods; on the other, it is limited to reproduction and to the conservation of
human life (to which is added, it is true, the struggle against pain, whose impor-
tance itself suffices to indicate the negative character of the pleasure principle

                                             16
                       THE NOTION OF EXPENDITURE          O   117

instituted, in theory, as the basis of utility). In the series of quantitative represen-
tations linked to this flat and untenable conception of existence only the question
of reproduction seriously lends itself to controversy, because an exaggerated
increase in the number of the living threatens to diminish the individual share.
But on the whole, any general judgment of social activity implies the principle
that all individual effort, in order to be valid, must be reducible to the funda-
mental necessities of production and conservation. Pleasure, whether art,
permissible debauchery, or play, is definitively reduced, in the intellectual repre-
sentations in circulation, to a concession; in other words it is reduced to a diver-
sion whose role is subsidiary. The most appreciable share of life is given as the
condition—sometimes even as the regrettable condition—of productive social
activity.
   It is true that personal experience —if it is a question of a youthful man, capa-
ble of wasting and destroying without reason—each time gives the lie to this
miserable conception. But even when he does not spare himself and destroys
himself while making allowance for nothing, the most lucid man will understand
nothing, or imagine himself sick; he is incapable of a utilitarian justification for
his actions, and it does not occur to him that a human society can have, just as
he does, an interest in considerable losses, in catastrophes that, while conform-
ing to well-defined needs, provoke tumultuous depressions, crises of dread, and,
in the final analysis, a certain orgiastic state.
    In the most crushing way, the contradiction between current social concep-
tions and the real needs of society recalls the narrowness of judgment that puts
the father in opposition to the satisfaction of his son’s needs. This narrowness
is such that it is impossible for the son to express his will. The father’s partially
malevolent solicitude is manifested in the things he provides for his son: lodg-
ings, clothes, food, and, when absolutely necessary, a little harmless recreation.
But the son does not even have the right to speak about what really gives him
a fever; he is obliged to give people the impression that for him no horror can
enter into consideration. In this respect, it is sad to say that conscious humanity
has remained a minor; humanity recognizes the right to acquire, to conserve,
and to consume rationally, but it excludes in principle nonproductive expen-
diture.
    It is true that this exclusion is superficial and that it no more modifies prac-
tical activities than prohibitions limit the son, who indulges in his unavowed
pleasures as soon as he 1s no longer in his father’s presence. Humanity can allow
itself the pleasure of expressing, in the father’s interest, conceptions marked
with flat paternal sufficiency and blindness. In the practice of life, however,
humanity acts in a way that allows for the satisfaction of disarmingly savage
needs, and it seems able to subsist only at the limits of horror. Moreover, to the
small extent that a man is incapable of yielding to considerations that either are
official or are susceptible of becoming so, to the small extent that he is inclined
                             118 O    THE   NOTION        OF EXPENDITURE


to feel the attraction of a life devoted to the destruction of established authority,
it is difficult to believe that a peaceful world, conforming to his interests, could
be for him anything other than a convenient illusion.
    The difficulties met with in the development of a conception that is not guided
by the servile mode of father-son relations are thus not insurmountable. It is pos-
sible to admit the historical necessity of vague and disappointing images, used
by a majority of people, who do not act without a minimum of error (which they
use as if it were a drug)—and who, moreover, in all circumstances refuse to find
their way in a labyrinth resulting from human inconsistencies. An extreme
simplification represents, for the uncultivated or barely cultivated segments of
the population, the only chance to avoid a diminution of aggressive force. But
it would be cowardly to accept, as a limit to understanding, the conditions of
poverty and necessity in which such simplified images are formed. And if a less
arbitrary    conception      is condemned         to remain      esoteric,   and   if as such,   in the
present circumstances, it comes into conflict with an unhealthy repulsion, then
one must stress that this repulsion is precisely the shame of a generation whose
rebels are afraid of the noise of their own words. Thus one cannot take it into
account.


                                     II. The Principle of Loss

Human activity is not entirely reducible to processes of production and conser-
vation, and consumption must be divided into two distinct parts. The first, re-
ducible part is represented by the use of the minimum necessary for the conser-
vation of life and the continuation of individuals’ productive activity in a given
society; it is therefore a question simply of the fundamental condition of produc-
tive activity. The second part is represented by so-called unproductive expendi-
tures: luxury, mourning, war, cults, the construction of sumptuary monuments,
games,      spectacles,    arts, perverse        sexual    activity   (i.e., deflected   from    genital
finality)—all these represent activities which, at least in primitive circumstances,
have no end beyond themselves. Now it is necessary to reserve the use of the
word expenditure for the designation of these unproductive forms, and not for
the designation of all the modes of consumption that serve as a means to the end
of production. Even though it is always possible to set the various forms of
expenditure in opposition to each other, they constitute a group characterized by
the fact that in each case the accent is placed on a loss that must be as great as
possible in order for that -activity to take on its true meaning.
   This     principle     of loss,    in other     words,     of unconditional      expenditure,      no
matter how contrary it might be to the economic principle of balanced accounts
(expenditure regularly compensated for by acquisition), only rational in the
narrow sense of the word, can be illustrated through a small number of examples
taken from common experience:
                      THE   NOTION   OF EXPENDITURE     (1   119


     1. Jewels must not only be beautiful and dazzling (which would make the
substitution of imitations possible): one sacrifices a fortune, preferring a dia-
mond necklace; such a sacrifice is necessary for the constitution of this neck-
lace’s fascinating character. This fact must be seen in relation to the symbolic
value of jewels, universal in psychoanalysis. When in a dream a diamond signi-
fies excrement, it is not only a question of association by contrast; in the uncon-
scious, jewels, like excrement, are cursed matter that flows from a wound: they
are a part of oneself destined for open sacrifice (they serve, in fact, as sumptuous
gifts charged with sexual love). The functional character of jewels requires their
immense material value and alone explains the inconsequence of the most beauti-
ful imitations, which are very nearly useless.
    2. Cults require a bloody wasting of men and animals in sacrifice. In the
etymological sense of the word, sacrifice is nothing other than the production
of sacred things.
    From the very first, it appears that sacred things are constituted by an opera-
tion of loss: in particular, the success of Christianity must be explained by the
value of the theme of the Son of God’s ignominious crucifixion, which carries
human dread to a representation of loss and limitless degradation.
    3. In various competitive games, loss in general is produced under complex
conditions. Considerable sums of money are spent for the maintenance of
quarters, animals, equipment, or men. As much energy as possible is squan-
dered in order to produce a feeling of stupefaction—in any case with an intensity
infinitely greater than in productive enterprises. The danger of death is not
avoided; on the contrary, it is the object of a strong unconscious attraction.
Besides, competitions are sometimes the occasion for the public distribution of
prizes. Immense crowds are present; their passions most often burst forth
beyond any restraint, and the loss of insane sums of money is set in motion in
the form of wagers. It is true that this circulation of money profits a small
number of professional bettors, but it is no less true that this circulation can be
considered to be a real charge of the passions unleashed by competition and that,
among a large number of bettors, it leads to losses disproportionate to their
means; these even attain such a level of madness that often the only way out for
gamblers is prison or death. Beyond this, various modes of unproductive expen-
diture can be linked, depending on the circumstances, to great competitive
spectacles, just as elements moving separately are caught up in a mightier whirl-
wind. Thus horse races are associated with a sumptuary process of social classi-
fication (the existence of Jockey Clubs need only be mentioned) and the ostenta-
tious display of the latest luxurious fashions. It is necessary in any case to
observe that the complex of expenditure represented by present-day racing 1s
insignificant when compared to the extravagance of the Byzantines, who tied the
totality of their public activity to equestrian competition.
    4. From the point of view of expenditure, artistic productions must be divided
                        120 O THE NOTION OF EXPENDITURE

into two main categories, the first constituted by architectural construction,
music, and dance. This category is comprised of real expenditures. Neverthe-
less, sculpture and painting, not to mention the use of sites for ceremonies and
spectacles, introduces even into architecture the principle of the second cate-
gory, that of symbolic expenditure. For their part, music and dance can easily
be charged with external significations.
   In their major form, literature and theater, which constitute the second cate-
gory, provoke dread and horror through symbolic representations of tragic loss
(degradation or death); in their minor form, they provoke laughter through
representations which, though analogously structured, exclude certain seductive
elements. The term poetry, applied to the least degraded and least intellectual-
ized forms of the expression of a state of loss, can be considered synonymous
with expenditure; it in fact signifies, in the most precise way, creation by means
of loss. Its meaning is therefore close to that of sacrifice. It is true that the word
‘“poetry’’ can only be appropriately applied to an extremely rare residue of what
it commonly signifies and that, without a preliminary reduction, the worst con-
fusions could result; it is, however, impossible in a first, rapid exposition to
speak of the infinitely variable limits separating subsidiary formations from the
residual element of poetry. It is easier to indicate that, for the rare human beings
who have this element at their disposal, poetic expenditure ceases to be symbolic
in its consequences; thus, to a certain extent, the function of representation
engages the very life of the one who assumes it. It condemns him to the most
disappointing forms of activity, to misery, to despair, to the pursuit of incon-
sistent shadows that provide nothing but vertigo or rage. The poet frequently can
use words only for his own loss; he is often forced to choose between the destiny
of a reprobate, who is as profoundly separated from society as dejecta are from
apparent life, and a renunciation whose price is a mediocre activity, subordi-
nated to vulgar and superficial needs.


           I11. Production, Exchange, and Unproductive Activity
Once the existence of expenditure as a social function has been established, it
is then necessary to consider the relations between this function and those of pro-
duction and acquisition that are opposed to it. These relations immediately
present themselves as those of an end with utility. And if it is true that production
and acquisition in their development and changes of form introduce a variable
that must be understood in order to comprehend historical processes, they are,
however, still only means subordinated to expenditure. As dreadful as it is,
human poverty has never had a strong enough hold on societies to cause the
concern for conservation—which gives production the appearance of an end—to
dominate the concern for unproductive expenditure. In order to maintain this
preeminence, since power is exercised by the classes that expend, poverty was
                      THE   NOTION   OF EXPENDITURE    U   121


excluded from all social activity. And the poor have no other way of reentering
the circle of power than through the revolutionary destruction of the classes
occupying that circle—in other words, through a bloody and in no way limited
social expenditure.
     The secondary character of production and acquisition in relation to expendi-
ture appears most clearly in primitive economic institutions, since exchange is
still treated as a sumptuary loss of ceded objects: thus at its base exchange pre-
sents itself as a process of expenditure, over which a process of acquisition has
developed. Classical economics imagined that primitive exchange occurred in
the form of barter; it had no reason to assume, in fact, that a means of acquisition
such as exchange might have as its origin not the need to acquire that it satisfies
today, but the contrary need, the need to destroy and to lose. The traditional
conceptions of the origins of economy have only recently been disproved—even
so recently that a great number of economists continue arbitrarily to represent
barter as the ancestor of commerce.
     In opposition to the artificial notion of barter, the archaic form of exchange
has been identified by Mauss under the name potlatch,! borrowed from the
Northwestern American Indians who provided such a remarkable example of it.
Institutions analogous to the Indian potlatch, or their traces, have been very
widely found.
     The potlatch of the Tlingit, the Haida, the Tsimshian, and the Kwakiutl of
the northwestern coast has been studied in detail since the end of the nineteenth
century (but at that time it was not compared with the archaic forms of exchange
of other countries). The least advanced of these American tribes practice pot-
latch on the occasion of a person’s change in situation—initiations, marriages,
funerals—and, even in a more evolved form, it can never be separated from a
festival; whether it provides the occasion for this festival, or whether it takes
place on the festival’s occasion. Potlatch excludes all bargaining and, in general,
it is constituted by a considerable gift of riches, offered openly and with the goal
of humiliating, defying, and obligating a rival. The exchange value of the gift
results from the fact that the donee, in order to efface the humiliation and
respond to the challenge, must satisfy the obligation (incurred by him at the time
of acceptance) to respond later with a more valuable gift, in other words, to
return with interest.
     But the gift is not the only form of potlatch; it is equally possible to defy
rivals through the spectacular destruction of wealth. It is through the interme-
diary of this last form that potlatch is reunited with religious sacrifice, since
what is destroyed is theoretically offered to the mythical ancestors of the donees.
Relatively recently a Tlingit chief appeared before his rival to slash the throats
of some of his own slaves. This destruction was repaid at a given date by the
slaughter of a greater number of slaves. The Tchoukchi of far northwestern
Siberia, who have institutions analogous to potlatch, slaughter dog teams in
                       122 (0 THE NOTION OF EXPENDITURE

order to stifle and humiliate another group. In northwestern America, destruc-
tion goes as far as the burning of villages and the smashing of flotillas of canoes.
Emblazoned copper ingots, a kind of money on which the fictive value of an
immense fortune is sometimes placed, are broken or thrown into the sea. The
delirium of the festival can be associated equally with hecatombs of property and
with gifts accumulated with the intention of stunning and humiliating.
    Usury, which regularly appears in these operations as obligatory surplus at
the time of the returned porlarch, gives rise to the observation that the loan with
interest must be substituted for barter in the history of the origins of exchange.
It must be recognized, in fact, that wealth is multiplied in potlatch civilizations
in a way that recalls the inflation of credit in banking civilizations; in other
words, it would be impossible to realize at once all the wealth possessed by the
total number of donors resulting from the obligations contracted by the total
number of donees. But this comparison applies only to a secondary characteristic
of potlatch.
    It is the constitution of a positive property of loss—from which spring nobil-
ity, honor, and rank in a hierarchy—that gives the institution its significant
value. The gift must be considered as a loss and thus as a partial destruction,
since the desire to destroy is in part transferred onto the recipient. In uncon-
scious forms, such as those described by psychoanalysis, it symbolizes ex-
cretion, which itself is linked to death, in conformity with the fundamental
connection between anal eroticism and sadism. The excremental symbolism of
emblazoned coppers, which on the Northwest Coast are the gift objects par
excellence, is based on a very rich mythology. In Melanesia, the donor desig-
nates as his excrement magnificent gifts, which he deposits at the feet of the rival
chief.
    The consequences in the realm of acquisition are only the unwanted result—at
least to the extent that the drives that govern the operation have remained primi-
tive—of a process oriented in the opposite direction. ‘‘The ideal,”’ indicates
Mauss, ‘‘would be to give a potlatch and not have it returned.’’ This ideal is
realized in certain forms of destruction to which custom allows no possible
response. Moreover, since the yields of potlatch are in some ways pledged
in advance in a new potlatch, the archaic principle of wealth is displayed with
none of the attenuations that result from the avarice developed at later stages;
wealth appears as an acquisition to the extent that power is acquired by a rich
man, but it is entirely directed toward loss in the sense that this power is char-
acterized as power to lose. It is only through loss that glory and honor are linked
to wealth.
    As a game, potlatch is the opposite of a principle of conservation: it puts an
end to the stability of fortunes as it existed within the totemic economy, where
possession was hereditary. An activity of excessive exchange replaced heredity
(as source of possession) with a kind of deliriously formed ritual poker. But the
                        THE    NOTION    OF EXPENDITURE      [J   123


players can never retire from the game, their fortunes made; they remain at the
mercy of provocation. At no time does a fortune serve to shelter its owner from
need.   On   the contrary,    it functionally   remains—as   does       its possessor—at   the
mercy of a need for limitless loss, which exists endemically in a social group.
    The nonsumptuary production and consumption upon which wealth depends
thus appear as relative utility.


             IV. The Functional Expenditure of the Wealthy Classes

The notion of potlatch, strictly speaking, should be reserved for expenditures
of an agonistic type, which are instigated by challenges and which lead to
responses. More precisely, it should be reserved for forms which, for archaic
societies, are not distinguishable from exchange.
    It is important to know that exchange, at its origin, was immediately sub-
ordinated to a human end; nevertheless it is evident that its development, linked
to progress in the modes of production, only started at the stage at which this
subordination ceased to be immediate. The very principle of the function of
production requires that products be exempt from loss, at least provisionally.
    In the market economy, the processes of exchange have an acquisitive sense.
Fortunes are no longer placed on a gambling table; they have become relatively
stable. It is only to the extent that stability is assured and can no longer be com-
promised by even considerable losses that these losses are submitted to the
regime of unproductive expenditure. Under these new conditions, the elemen-
tary components of potlatch are found in forms that are no longer as directly
agonistic.? Expenditure is still destined to acquire or maintain rank, but in prin-
ciple it no longer has the goal of causing another to lose his rank.
    In spite of these attenuations, ostentatious loss remains universally linked to
wealth, as its ultimate function.
    More or less narrowly, social rank is linked to the possession of a fortune,
but only on the condition that the fortune be partially sacrificed in unproductive
social expenditures such as festivals, spectacles, and games. One notes that in
primitive societies, where the exploitation of man by man is still fairly weak,
the products of human activity not only flow in great quantities to rich men be-
cause of the protection or social leadership services these men supposedly pro-
vide, but also because of the spectacular collective expenditures for which they
must pay. In so-called civilized societies, the fundamental obligation of wealth
disappeared only in a fairly recent period. The decline of paganism led to a de-
cline of the games and cults for which wealthy Romans were obliged to pay; thus
it has been said that Christianity individualized property, giving its possessor
total control over his products and abrogating his social function. It abrogated
at least the obligation of this expenditure, for Christianity replaced pagan ex-
penditure prescribed by custom with voluntary alms, either in the form of distri-
                           124 1 THE NOTION OF EXPENDITURE

butions from the rich to the poor, or (and above all) in the form of extremely
significant contributions to churches and later to monasteries. And these
churches and monasteries precisely assumed, in the Middle Ages, the major part
of the spectacular function.
    Today the great and free forms of unproductive social expenditure have dis-
appeared. One must not conclude from this, however, that the very principle of
expenditure is no longer the end of economic activity.
    A certain evolution of wealth, whose symptoms indicate sickness and exhaus-
tion, leads to shame in oneself accompanied by petty hypocrisy. Everything that
was generous, orgiastic, and excessive has disappeared; the themes of rivalry
upon which individual activity still depends develop in obscurity, and are as
shameful as belching. The representatives of the bourgeoisie have adopted an
effaced manner; wealth is now displayed behind closed doors, in accordance
with depressing and boring conventions. In addition, people in the middle
class—employees and small shopkeepers—having attained mediocre or minute
fortunes, have managed to debase and subdivide ostentatious expenditure, of
which nothing remains but vain efforts tied to tiresome rancor.
    Such trickery has become the principle reason for living, working, and suf-
fering for those who lack the courage to condemn this moldy society to revolu-
tionary destruction. Around modern banks, as around the totem poles of the
Kwakiutl, the same desire to dazzle animates individuals and leads them into a
system of petty displays that blinds them to each other, as if they were staring
into a blinding light. À few steps from the bank, jewels, dresses, and cars wait
behind shop windows for the day when they will serve to establish the aug-
mented splendor of a sinister industrialist and his even more sinister old wife.
At   a lower   level,   gilded   clocks,     dining   room   buffets,   and   artificial   flowers
render equally shameful service to a grocer and his wife. Jealousy arises
between human beings, as it does among the savages, and with an equivalent
brutality; only generosity and nobility have disappeared, and with them the
dazzling contrast that the rich provided to the poor.
    As the class that possesses the wealth—having received with wealth the obli-
gation of functional expenditure—the modern bourgeoisie is characterized by the
refusal in principle of this obligation. It has distinguished itself from the aristoc-
racy through the fact that it has consented only to spend for itself, and within
itself—in other words, by hiding its expenditures as much as possible from the
eyes of the other classes. This particular form was originally due to the develop-
ment of its wealth in the shadow of a more powerful noble class. The rationalist
conceptions developed by the bourgeoisie, starting in the seventeenth century,
were a response to these humiliating conceptions of restrained expenditure; this
rationalism meant nothing other than the strictly economic representation of the
world—economic          in the vulgar      sense,   the bourgeois   sense,    of the word.    The
hatred of expenditure is the raison d’étre of and the justification for the bour-
                      THE   NOTION   OF EXPENDITURE    U   125


geoisie; it is at the same time the principle of its horrifying hypocrisy. À funda-
mental grievance of the bourgeois was the prodigality of feudal society and, after
coming to power, they believed that, because of their habits of accumulation,
they were capable of acceptably dominating the poorer classes. And 1t is right
to recognize that the people are incapable of hating them as much as their former
masters, to the extent that they are incapable of loving them, for the bourgeois
are incapable of concealing a sordid face, a face so rapacious and lacking in
nobility, so frighteningly small, that all human life, upon seeing it, seems
degraded.
   In opposition, the people’s consciousness is reduced to maintaining pro-
foundly the principle of expenditure by representing bourgeois existence as the
shame of man and as a sinister cancellation.


                                V. Class Struggle
In trying to maintain sterility in regard to expenditure, in conformity with a
reasoning that balances accounts, bourgeois society has only managed to
develop a universal meanness. Human life only rediscovers agitation on the
scale of irreducible needs through the efforts of those who push the conse-
quences of current rationalist conceptions as far as they will go. What remains
of the traditional modes of expenditure has become atrophied, and living sump-
tuary tumult has been lost in the unprecedented explosion of class struggle.
    The components of class struggle are seen in the process of expenditure,
dating back to the archaic period. In potlatch, the rich man distributes products
furnished him by other, impoverished, men. He tries to rise above a rival who
is rich like himself, but the ultimate stage of his foreseen elevation has no more
necessary a goal than his further separation from the nature of destitute men.
Thus expenditure, even though it might be a social function, immediately leads
to an agonistic and apparently antisocial act of separation. The rich man con-
sumes the poor man’s losses, creating for him a category of degradation and
abjection that leads to slavery. Now it is evident that, from the endlessly trans-
mitted heritage of the sumptuary world, the modern world has received slavery,
and has reserved it for the proletariat. Without a doubt bourgeois society, which
pretends to govern according to rational principles, and which, through its own
actions, moreover, tends to realize a certain human homogeneity, does not
accept without protest a division that seems destructive to man himself; it is in-
capable, however, of pushing this resistance further than theoretical negation.
It gives the workers rights equal to those of the masters, and it announces this
equality by inscribing that word on walls. But the masters, who act as if they
were the expression of society itself, are preoccupied—more seriously than with
any other concern—with showing that they do not in any way share the abjection
of the men they employ. The end of the workers' activity is to produce in order
                       126 U   THE   NOTION   OF EXPENDITURE


to live, but the bosses’ activity is to produce in order to condemn the working
producers to a hideous degradation—for there is no disjunction possible be-
tween, on the one hand, the characterization the bosses seek through their modes
of expenditure, which tend to elevate them high above human baseness, and on
the other hand this baseness itself, of which this characterization is a function.
     In opposition to this conception of agonistic social expenditure, there is the
representation of numerous bourgeois efforts to ameliorate the lot of the
workers—but this representation is only the expression of the cowardice of the
modern upper classes, who no longer have the force to recognize the results of
their own destructive acts. The expenditures taken on by the capitalists in order
to aid the proletarians and give them a chance to pull themselves up on the social
ladder only bear witness to their inability (due to exhaustion) to carry out
thoroughly a sumptuary process. Once the loss of the poor man 1s accomplished,
little by little the pleasure of the rich man is emptied and neutralized; it gives
way to a kind of apathetic indifference. Under these conditions, in order to main-
tain a neutral state rendered relatively agreeable by apathy (and which exists in
spite of troublesome elements such as sadism and pity), it can be useful to com-
pensate for the expenditure that engenders abjection with a new expenditure,
which tends to attenuate it. The bosses’ political sense, together with certain
partial developments of prosperity, has allowed this process of compensation to
be, at times, quite extensive. Thus in the Anglo-Saxon countries, and in partic-
ular in the United States of America, the primary process takes place at the
expense of only a relatively small portion of the population: to a certain extent,
the working class itself has been led to participate in it (above all when this was
facilitated by the preliminary existence of a class held to be abject by common
accord, as in the case of the blacks). But these subterfuges, whose importance
is in any case strictly limited, do not modify in any way the fundamental division
between noble and ignoble men. The cruel game of social life does not vary
among the different civilized countries, where the insulting splendor of the rich
loses and degrades the human nature of the lower class.
     It must be added that the attenuation of the masters’ brutality—which in any
case has less to do with destruction itself than with the psychological tendencies
to destroy—corresponds to the general atrophy of the ancient sumptuary
processes that characterizes the modern era.
     Class struggle, on the contrary, becomes the grandest form of social expen-
diture when it is taken up again and developed, this time on the part of the
workers, and on such a scale that it threatens the very existence of the masters.


                       VI. Christianity and Revolution
Short of revolt, it has been possible for the provoked poor to refuse all moral
participation in a system in which men oppress men; in certain historical circum-
                       THE   NOTION    OF EXPENDITURE        LU    127


stances, they succeeded, through the use of symbols even more striking than
reality, in lowering all of ‘‘human nature’’ to such a horrifying ignominy that
the pleasure found by the rich in measuring the poverty of others suddenly
became too acute to be endured without vertigo. Thus, independently of all ritual
forms, an exchange of exasperated challenges was established, exacerbated
above all by the poor, a potlatch in which real refuse and revealed moral filth
entered into a rivalry of horrible grandeur with everything in the world that was
rich, pure,   and brilliant; and an exceptional outlet was found for this form of
spasmodic convulsion         in   religious     despair,   which         was   its   unreserved
exploitation.
   In Christianity,   the alternations between        the exaltation and dread,         tortures
and orgies constituting religious life were conjoined in a more tragic way and
were merged with a sick social structure, which was tearing itself apart with the
dirtiest cruelty. The triumphal song of the Christians glorifies God because he
has entered into the bloody game of social war, and because he has ‘‘hurled the
powerful from the heights of their grandeur and has exalted the miserably
poor.‘’ Their myths associate social ignominy and the cadaverous degradation
of the torture victim with divine splendor. In this way religion assumes the total
oppositional function manifested by contrary forces, which up to this point had
been divided between the rich and the poor, with the one group condemning the
other to ruin. It is closely tied to terrestrial despair, since it itself is only an
epiphenomenon of the measureless hate that divides men—but an epiphenom-
enon that tends to substitute itself for the totality of divergent processes it sum-
marizes. In conformity with the words attributed to Christ, who said he came
to divide and not to reign, religion thus does not at all try to do away with what
others consider the scourge of man.           On the contrary, in its immediate         form,   it
wallows in a revolting impurity that is indispensable to its ecstatic torment.
    The meaning of Christianity is given in the development of the delirious con-
sequences of the expenditure of classes, in a mental agonistic orgy practiced at
the expense of the real struggle.
    However, in spite of the importance that it has had in human activity, Chris-
tian humiliation is only an episode in the historic struggle of the ignoble against
the noble, of the impure against the pure. It is as if society, conscious of its own
intolerable splitting, had become for a time dead drunk in order to enjoy it
sadistically. But the heaviest drunkenness has not done away with the conse-
quences of human poverty, and, with the exploited classes opposing the superior
classes with greater lucidity, no conceivable limit can be assigned to hatred. In
historical agitation, only the word Revolution dominates the customary confu-
sion and carries with it the promise that answers the unlimited demands of the
masses. As for the masters and the exploiters, whose function 1s to create the
contemptuous forms that exclude human nature—causing this nature to exist at
the limits of the earth, in other words in mud—a simple law of reciprocity re-
                         128 [0 THE NOTION OF EXPENDITURE

quires that they be condemned to fear, to the great night when their beautiful
phrases will be drowned out by death screams in riots. That is the bloody hope
which, each day, is one with the existence of the people, and which sums up
the insubordinate content of the class struggle.
    Class struggle has only one possible end: the loss of those who have worked
to lose ‘‘human nature.”
   But whatever form of development is foreseen, be it revolutionary or servile,
the general convulsions constituted eighteen hundred years ago by the religious
ecstasy of the Christians, and today by the workers’ movement, must equally
be represented as a decisive impulse constraining society to use the exclusion
of one class by another to realize a mode of expenditure as tragic and as free
as possible, and at the same time constraining it to introduce sacred forms so
human that the traditional forms become relatively contemptible. It is the tropic
character of such movements that accounts for the total human value of the
workers’ Revolution, a Revolution capable of exerting a force of attraction as
strong as the force that directs simple organisms toward the sun.


                  VII. The Insubordination          of Material   Facts

Human life, distinct from juridical existence, existing as it does on a globe iso-
lated in celestial space, from night to day and from one country to another—
human life cannot in any way be limited to the closed systems assigned to it by
reasonable conceptions. The immense travail of recklessness, discharge, and
upheaval that constitutes life could be expressed by stating that life starts only
with the deficit of these systems; at least what it allows in the way of order and
reserve has meaning only from the moment when the ordered and reserved
forces liberate and lose themselves for ends that cannot be subordinated to any-
thing one can account for. It is only by such insubordination—even if it is im-
poverished—that the human race ceases to be isolated in the unconditional splen-
dor of material things.
    In fact, in the most universal way, isolated or in groups, men find themselves
constantly engaged in processes of expenditure. Variations in form do not in any
way alter the fundamental characteristics of these processes, whose principle is
loss. A certain excitation, whose sum total is maintained at a noticeably constant
level, animates collectivities and individuals. In their intensified form, the states
of excitation, which are comparable to toxic states, can be defined as the illogical
and irresistible impulse to reject material or moral goods that it would have been
possible to utilize rationally (in conformity with the balancing of accounts). Con-
nected to the losses that are realized in this way—in the case of the ‘‘lost
woman’’ as well as in the case of military expenditure—is the creation of un-
productive   values;   the   most   absurd   of these values,   and   the one   that makes
people the most rapacious, is glory. Made complete through degradation, glory,
                          THE   NOTION     OF EXPENDITURE        J   129


appearing in a sometimes sinister and sometimes brilliant form, has never ceased
to dominate social existence; it is impossible to attempt to do anything without
it when it is dependent on the blind practice of personal or social loss.
    In this way the boundless refuse of activity pushes human plans—including
those associated with economic operations—into the game of characterizing
universal matter; matter, in fact, can only be defined as the nonlogical difference
that represents in relation to the economy of the universe what crime represents
in relation to the law. The glory that sums up or symbolizes (without exhausting)
the object of free expenditure,        while it can never exclude crime, cannot be dis-
tinguished—at least if one takes into account the only characterization that has
a value comparable to matter—from the insubordinate characterization, which
is not the condition for anything else.
    If in addition to one demonstrates the interest, concurrent with glory (as well
as with degradation), which the human community necessarily sees in the
qualitative change constantly realized by the movement of history, and if,
finally, one demonstrates that this movement is impossible to contain or direct
toward a limited end, it becomes possible, having abandoned all reserves, to
assign a relative value to utility. Men assure their own subsistence or avoid suf-
fering, not because these functions themselves lead to a sufficient result, but in
order to accede to the insubordinate function of free expenditure.

                                              Notes

      1. On potlatch, see above all Marcel Mauss, ‘‘Essai sur le don, form archaîque de l’échange’”
in Année sociologique, 1925. [Translated as The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic
Societies, trans. I. Cunnison (New York: Norton, 1967). Tr.]
      2. In other words: involving rivalry and struggle.
Sacrifices




                                          1
Me,' 1 exist—suspended in a realized void—suspended from my own dread—
different from all other being and such that the various events that can reach all
other being and not me cruelly throw this me out of a total existence. But, at
the same time, I consider my coming into the world—which depended on the
birth and on the conjunction of a given man and woman, then on the moment
of their conjunction.   There exists, in fact, a unique   moment   in relation to the
possibility of me—and thus the infinite improbability of this coming into the
world appears. For if the tiniest difference had occurred in the course of the suc-
cessive events of which I am the result, in the place of this me, integrally avid
to be me, there would have been ‘‘an other.’’
    The immense realized void 1s this infinite improbability and across it I, as
imperative existence, play, because a simple presence suspended above such an
immensity is comparable to the exercise of a dominion, as if the void in whose
midst I am demands that I be me and the dread of this me. The immediate exi-
gency of nothingness would thus imply not undifferentiated being but the painful
improbability of the unique me.
    The empirical knowledge of the structure this me has in common with the
other mes has become an absurdity in this void where my dominion manifests
itsclf, for the very essence of the me that I am consists in the fact that no other
conceivable existence can replace it; the total improbability of my coming into
the world poses, in an imperative mode, a total heterogeneity.

                                          130
                                SACRIFICES    O   131


    A fortiori a historical representation of the formation of me (considered as a
part of everything that is an object of knowledge) and of its imperative or im-
personal modes dissipates, and this allows only the subsistence of the violence
and the avidity for the dominion of the me over the void in which it is suspended;
at will, even in its prison, the me that I am realizes everything that preceded it
or surrounds it, whether it exists as life or as simple being, as a void submitted
to its anxious dominion.
    The fact of supposing the existence of a possible and even necessary point
of view that demands the inaccuracy of such a revelation (this supposition is
implied by the recourse to expression) in no way invalidates the immediate
reality of the experience lived by the imperative presence in the world of me;
this lived experience equally constitutes an inevitable point of view, a direction
of being required by the eagerness of its own movement.


                                         II

A choice between opposing representations must be linked to the inconcetvable
solution to the problem of that which exists: what exists as profound existence
liberated from the forms of appearance? Most often the hasty and ill-considered
answer is given as if the question what is there that is imperative? (what is the
moral value) and not what exists? had been posed. In other cases—where philos-
ophy is deprived of its object—the no less hasty response is only the perfect and
partial avoidance (and not the destruction) of the problem, if matter is repre-
sented as profound existence.
    But from this it is possible to see—within the relatively clear given limits,
beyond which doubt itself disappears with the other possibilities—that, while the
meanings of all positive judgments on profound existence are not distinguishable
from fundamental value judgments, thought remains free on the other hand to
constitute the me   as a foundation   of all value      without   confusing   this me   (the
value) with profound existence, and even without inscribing it within the frame-
work of a reality that is manifest but hidden from plain sight.
    The me, completely other due to its constitutive improbability, has been
rejected in the course of the normal search for ‘‘that which exists’’ as the arbi-
trary but eminent image of nonexistence; it is as illusion that it responds to the
extreme demands of life. In other words, the me, as an impasse outside of ‘“that
which exists’’—and in which are found reunited, without any way out, all the
extreme values of life—even though it is constituted in the presence of reality,
does not belong in anyway to this reality, which it transcends. It neutralizes itself
(ceases to be completely other) insofar as it ceases to be aware of the total im-
probability of its coming into the world, and consequently of its fundamental
lack of relations with the world (to the extent that it is explicitly known—
represented as the interdependence and chronological succession of objects—the
                                   132 (O SACRIFICES

world, as the integral development of that which exists, must in fact appear
necessary or probable).
    In an arbitrary order where each element of self-awareness escapes from the
world (absorbed in the convulsive projection of the me), to the extent that philos-
ophy, renouncing all hope of logical construction, arrives at—as at an end—
a representation of relations defined as improbable (and which are only the
middle terms of ultimate improbability), it is possible to represent the me in
tears, or anxious; it can equally be thrown, in the case of a painful erotic choice,
in the direction of a me other than itself but also other than any other. And thus
the me can increase, as far as the eye can see, its painful awareness of its own
escape out of the world—but it is only at the boundary of death that laceration,
which constitutes the very nature of the immensely free me, transcending ‘‘that
which   exists,’’   is revealed with violence.
    In the coming of death, there appears a structure of the me that is entirely
different from the ‘‘abstract me’’ (discovered, not through an active reflection
reacting against all opposing limits, but through a logical investigation giving
itself the form of its object in advance). This specific structure of the me is also
distinct from the moments of personal existence, locked away due to practical
activity and neutralized in the logical appearances of ‘‘that which exists.”’ The
me accedes to its specificity and to its integral transcendence only in the form
of the ‘“me that dies.”
    But this revelation of the me that dies is not given each time simple death is
revealed to dread. It supposes the imperative completion and sovereignty of
being at the moment it is projected into the unreal time of death. It supposes at
once the exigency and the limitless breakdown of imperative life, the conse-
quence of pure seduction and the heroic form of the me; it thus attains the
rending subversion of the god that dies.
    The death of the god is produced not as metaphysical alteration (concerning
the common denominator of being), but as the absorption of a life avid for im-
perative joy in the heavy animality of death. The filthy aspects of the torn-apart
body guarantee the totality of disgust where life subsides.
    In this revelation of free, divine nature, the obstinate orientation of the avidity
of life toward death (as it is given in every form of play or dream) no longer
appears as a need for cancellation, but as the pure avidity to be me, death or
the void being only the domain where—by its very breakdown—a dominion of
the me, which must be represented as vertigo, infinitely raises itself up. This me,
and this dominion, arrive at the purity of their desperate nature and thus realize
the pure hope of the me that dies: it is the hope of a drunken man, pushing the
boundaries of the dream beyond all conceivable limits.
    At the same time the shadow of the divine person, laden with love, disap-
pears—not exactly as vain appearance, but as dependence on a denied world that
is founded on the reciprocal dependence of its parts.
                                SACRIFICES    C   133

    It was the will to purify love of all preconditions that posed the unconditional
existence of God as the supreme object of a rapturous escape from the self. But
the conditional counterpart of divine majesty—the principle of political
authority—leads the affective movement into the linkage of oppressed existences
with moral imperatives; the affective movement 1s thrown back into the platitude
of applied life, where the me as me withers away.
    When the man-god appears and dies both as rottenness and as the redemption
of the supreme person, revealing that life will answer avidity only on condition
that it be lived as the me that dies, he nonetheless eludes the pure imperative
of this me: he subjects it to the applied (moral) imperative of God and thus gives
the me as existence for orhers, for God, and morality alone as existence for itself.
    In an ideally brilliant and empty infinity, chaos to the point of revealing the
absence of chaos, the anxious loss of life opens, but life only loses itself —at the
limit of the last breath—for this empty infinity. The me raises itself to the pure
imperative, living-dying for an abyss without walls or floor; this imperative is
formulated as ‘‘die like a dog’’ in the strangest part of being. It abandons all
applications in the world.
    In the fact that life and death are passionately devoted to the subsidence of
the void, the slave’s subordinate relation to the master is no longer revealed, but
life and void are confused and mingled like lovers, in the convulsive movements
of the end. Burning passion is no longer acceptance and realization of nothing-
ness: nothingness is still a cadaver; brilliance is the blood that flows and
coagulates.
    And just as the freed obscene nature of their organs more passionately con-
nects embracing lovers, so too the nearby horror of the cadaver and the present
horror of blood tie the me that dies more obscurely to an empty infinity—and
this empty infinity is itself projected as cadaver and as blood.


                                        III
In this hasty and still confused revelation of an ultimate region of being, at which
philosophy, like all communal human determinations, only arrives in spite of
itself (like a manhandled corpse), the fundamental problem of being was even
suspended when the aggressive subversion of the me accepted illusion as the
adequate description of its nature. In this way all possible mysticism was re-
jected, in other words, all particular revelation to which respect could have
given form. Likewise, the imperative avidity for life, ceasing to accept as its
domain the narrow circle of logically ordered appearances, had nothing more
than an unknown death at the summit of its avid elevation and as object it had
nothing more than the reflection of this death in deserted night.
    Christian meditation before the cross was no longer rejected with simple
hostility, but assumed in a total hostility that demanded embracing the cross—in
                                 134 O SACRIFICES

hand-to-hand combat. And thus it must and it can be lived as death of the me,
not as respectful adoration but with the avidity of sadistic ecstasy, the surge of
a blind madness that alone accedes to the passion of the pure imperative.
    In the course of the ecstatic vision, at the limit of death on the cross and of
the blindly lived lamma sabachtani, the object is finally unveiled as catastrophe
in a chaos of light and shadow, neither as God nor as nothingness, but as the
object that love, incapable of liberating itself except outside of itself, demands
in order to let out the scream of lacerated existence.
    In this position of object as catastrophe, thought lives the annihilation that
constitutes it as a vertiginous and infinite fall, and thus has not only catastrophe
as its object; its very structure is catastrophe—it is itself absorption in the
nothingness that supports it and at the same time slips away. Something immense
is liberated from all sides with the magnitude of a cataract, surging forth from
unreal regions of the infinite, sinking into them in a movement of inconceivable
force. The mirror that, in the crash of telescoping trains, suddenly slashes open
one’s throat is the expression of this imperative—implacable—but already anni-
hilated irruption.
    In common circumstances, time appears locked—and practically annulled—in
each permanent form and in each succession that can be grasped as permanence.
Each movement susceptible of being inscribed in an order annuls time, which
is absorbed in a system of measure and equivalence—thus time, having become
virtually reversible, withers, and with time all existence.
    However, burning love—consuming the existence exhaled with great
screams—has no other horizon than a catastrophe, a scene of horror that releases
time from its bonds.
    Catastrophe—lived time—must be represented ecstatically not in the form of
an old man, but as a skeleton armed with a scythe: a glacial and gleaming skele-
ton, to whose teeth adhere the lips of a severed head. As skeleton it is completed
destruction, but armed destruction amounting to imperative purity.
    Destruction gnaws deeply and thus purifies sovereignty itself. The imperative
purity of time is opposed to God, whose skeleton is hidden behind gold drap-
eries, under a tiara, and behind a mask: the divine mask and suavity express the
application of an imperative form, giving itself as providence for the manage-
ment of political oppression. But in divine love the freezing gleam of a sadistic
skeleton is infinitely unveiled.
    Revolt—its face distorted by amorous ecstasy—tears from God his naive
mask, and thus oppression collapses in the crash of time. Catastrophe is that by
which a nocturnal horizon is set ablaze, that for which lacerated existence goes
into a trance—it is the Revolution—it is time released from all bonds; it is pure
change; it is a skeleton that emerges from its cadaver as from a cocoon and that
sadistically lives the unreal existence of death.
                                SACRIFICES    O   135


                                         IV

Thus the nature of time as object of ecstasy reveals itself in accordance with the
ecstatic nature of the me that dies. For the one and the other are pure change
and both take place on the plane of an illusory existence.
    But if the avid and obstinate question ‘‘what exists?’’ still traverses the
immense   disorder of living thought    in the mode     of the me that dies, what will
be the meaning, at this moment, of the answer: ‘‘time is only an empty
absurdity’’?—or of all the other answers that refuse the being of time?
    Or what will be the meaning of the opposite answer: ‘‘being 1s time’’?
    More clearly than in an order limited to the narrow realizations of order, the
problem of the being of time can be elucidated in a disorder embracing the total-
ity of conceivable forms. First of all the effort at a dialectical construction of
contradictory answers is set aside insofar as it is a prejudice that would evade
the rending implications of any problem.
    Time 1s not the synthesis of being and nothingness if being or nothingness are
only found in time and are only arbitrarily separated notions. There is, in fact,
neither isolated being nor isolated nothingness; there 1s time. But to affirm the
existence of time is an empty assertion in the sense that it gives less the vague
attribute of existence to time than the nature of time to existence; in other words,
it empties the notion of existence of its vague and limitless content, and at the
same time 1t infinitely empties it of all content.
    The existence of time does not even require the objective position of time as
such; this existence, posed in ecstasy, means only the flight and the collapse of
any object that understanding sought to give itself both as a value and as a fixed
object. The existence of time projected arbitrarily into an objective region is
only the ecstatic vision of a catastrophe destroying that which founds this region.
Not because the region of objects is necessarily, like the me, infinitely destroyed
by time itself, but because existence founded in the me suddenly looms there,
destroyed, and because the existence of things is impoverished in comparison
with that of the me.
    The existence of things, assuming the value for me—projecting an absurd
shadow—of the preparations for an execution, cannot enclose the death it brings,
but is itself projected into this death, which encloses it.
    To affirm the illusory existence of the me and of time (which 1s not only the
structure of the me but the object of its erotic ecstasy) does not therefore mean
that the tllusion must be subjected to the judgment of things whose existence 1s
profound, but that profound existence must be projected into the illusion that
encloses it.
   The being   which,   under a human    name,    1s me,   and whose   coming   into the
world—across a space peopled with stars— was infinitely improbable, neverthe-
less encloses the world of the totality of things precisely because of its funda-
                                         136 L] SACRIFICES

mental improbability (which is opposed to the structure of the real giving itself
as such). The death that delivers me from the world that kills me has enclosed
this real world in the unreality of the me that dies.

                                                  Note

      1. [*“Le moi,”’ usually translated as ‘“the L,"’ ‘“the Self,’’ or (in psychoanalysis) ‘‘the ego,”’
has been translated here as ‘‘the me’’ (or ‘“me’’), in order to remain faithful to Bataille’s syntax. Tr.]
The Psychological Structure of Fascism




Having affirmed that the infrastructure of a society ultimately determines or
conditions the superstructure, Marxism did not undertake any general elucida-
tion of the modalities peculiar to the formation of religious and political society.
While Marxism did acknowledge possible responses by the superstructure, it has
not gone from mere assertion to scientific analysis. This essay attempts a rigor-
ous (if not comprehensive) representation of the social superstructure and its
relations to the economic infrastructure in the light of fascism. The fact that this
is but a fragment of a relatively substantial whole explains a great number of
lacunae, notably the absence of any methodological considerations;* it was even
necessary to forego justifying the novelty of my point of view and to limit myself
to the presentation of my basic position. However, the simple presentation of the
structure of fascism had to be preceded by a description of the social structure
as a whole.
    It goes without saying that a study of the superstructure presupposes the
development of a Marxist analysis of the infrastructure.


                      The Homogeneous          Part of Society
A psychological description of society must begin with that segment which is
most accessible to understanding—and apparently the most fundamental seg-
ment—whose significant trait is tendential homogeneity.? Homogeneity signifies
here the commensurability of elements and the awareness of this commensura-
bility: human relations are sustained by a reduction to fixed rules based on the

                                         137
              138 D THE PSYCHOLOGICAL       STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

consciousness of the possible identity of delineable persons and situations; in
principle, all violence is excluded from this course of existence.
    Production is the basis of a social homogeneity.®* Homogeneous society is
productive society, namely, useful society. Every useless element is excluded,
not from all of society, but from its homogeneous part. In this part, each element
must be useful to another without the homogeneous activity ever being able to
attain the form of activity valid in itself. A useful activity has a common denomi-
nator with another useful activity, but not with activity for itself.
    The common denominator, the foundation of social homogeneity and of the
activity arising from it, is money, namely, the calculable equivalent of the differ-
ent products of collective activity. Money serves to measure all work and makes
man a function of measurable products. According to the judgment of homo-
geneous society, each man is worth what he produces; in other words, he stops
being an existence for itself. he is no more than a function, arranged within
measurable limits, of collective production (which makes him an existence for
something other than itself).
    But the homogeneous individual is truly a function of his personal products
only in artisan production, where the means of production are relatively inex-
pensive and can be owned by the artisan. In industrial civilization, the producer
is distinguished from the owner of the means of production, and it is the latter
who appropriates the products for himself: consequently, it is he who, in modern
society, is the function of the products; it is he—and not the producer—who
founds social homogeneity.
    Thus in the present order of things, the homogeneous part of society is made
up of those men who own the means of production or the money destined for
their upkeep or purchase. It is exactly in the middle segment of the so-called
capitalist or bourgeois class that the tendential reduction of human character
takes place, making it an abstract and interchangeable entity: a reflection of the
homogeneous things the individual owns.
    This reduction is then extended as much as possible to the so-called middle
classes that variously benefit from realized profit. But the industrial proletariat
remains for the most part irreducible. It maintains a double relation to homo-
geneous activity: the latter excludes it—not from work but from profit. As
agents of production, the workers fall within the framework of the social organi-
zation, but the homogeneous reduction as a rule only affects their wage-earning
activity; they are integrated into the psychological homogeneity in terms of their
behavior on the job, but not generally as men. Outside of the factory, and even
beyond its technical operations, a laborer is, with regard to a homogeneous
person (boss, bureaucrat, etc.), a stranger, a man    of another nature, of a non-
reduced, nonsubjugated nature.
               THE     PSYCHOLOGICAL      STRUCTURE       OF FASCISM     0   139


                                        II. The   State

In the contemporary period, social homogeneity 1s linked to the bourgeois class
by essential ties: thus the Marxist conception is justified whenever the State is
shown to be at the service of a threatened homogeneity.
    As a rule, social homogeneity is a precarious form, at the mercy of violence
and even of internal dissent. It forms spontaneously in the play of productive
organization, but must constantly be protected from the various unruly elements
that do not benefit from production, or not enough to suit them, or simply, that
cannot tolerate the checks that homogeneity imposes on unrest. In such condi-
tions, the protection of homogeneity lies in its recourse to imperative elements
that are capable of obliterating the various unruly forces or bringing them under
the control of order.
    The State is not itself one of these imperative elements; it is distinct from
kings, heads of the army, or of nations, but it is the result of the modifications
undergone by a part of homogeneous society as it comes into contact with such
elements. This part is an intermediary formation between the homogeneous
classes and the sovereign agencies from which it must borrow its obligatory char-
acter, but whose exercise of sovereignty must rely upon it as an intermediary.
It is only with reference to these sovereign agencies that it will be possible to en-
vision the way in which this obligatory character is transferred to a formation that
nevertheless does not constitute an existence valid in itself (heterogeneous), but
simply an activity whose usefulness with regard to another part 1s manifest.
     In practical terms, the function of the State consists of an interplay of author-
 ity and adaptation. The reduction of differences through compromise in parlia-
mentary practice indicates all the possible complexity of the internal activity of
adaptation required by homogeneity. But against forces that cannot be assimi-
 lated, the State cuts matters short with strict authority.
     Depending on whether the State is democratic or despotic, the prevailing
 tendency will be either adaptation or authority. In a democracy, the State derives
 most of its strength from spontaneous homogeneity, which it fixes and consti-
tutes as the rule. The principle of its sovereignty—the nation—providing both
its end and its strength, is thus diminished by the fact that isolated individuals
 increasingly consider themselves as ends with regard to the State, which would
thus exist for them before existing for the nation. And, in this case, personal life
distinguishes itself from homogeneous existence as a value that presents itself
as incomparable.


       III. Dissociations, Critiques of Social Homogeneity and the State
Even    in difficult   circumstances,    the   State   is able   to neutralize     those   hetero-
geneous forces that will yield only to its constraints. But it can succumb to the
               140 OO THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

internal dissociation of that segment of society of which it is but the constrictive
form.
    Social homogeneity fundamentally depends upon the homogeneity (in the
general sense of the word) of the productive system. Every contradiction arising
from the development of economic life thus entails a tendential dissociation of
homogeneous social existence. This tendency towards dissociation exerts itself
in the most complex manner, on all levels and in every direction. But it only
reaches acute and dangerous forms to the extent that an appreciable segment of
the mass of homogeneous individuals ceases to have an interest in the conserva-
tion of the existing form of homogeneity (not because it is homogeneous, but on
the contrary, because it is in the process of losing that character). This part of
society then spontaneously affiliates itself with the previously constituted hetero-
geneous forces and becomes indistinguishable from them.
    Thus, economic circumstances act directly upon homogeneous elements and
promote their disintegration. But this disintegration only represents the negative
form of social effervescence: the dissociated elements do not act before having
undergone the complete alteration that characterizes the positive form of this
effervescence. From the moment that they rejoin the heterogeneous formations
that already exist in either a diffuse or an organized state, they acquire from the
latter a new character: the general positive character of heterogeneity. Further-
more, social heterogeneity does not exist in a formless and disoriented state: on
the contrary, it constantly tends to a split-off structure; and when social elements
pass over to the heterogeneous side, their action still finds itself determined by
the actual structure of that side.
    Thus, the mode of resolving acute economic contradictions depends upon
both the historical state and the general laws of the heterogeneous social region
in which the effervescence acquires its positive form; it depends in particular
upon the relations established between the various formations of this region
when homogeneous society finds itself materially dissociated.
    The study of homogeneity and of the conditions of its existence thus neces-
sarily leads to the essential study of heterogeneity. In fact, it constitutes the first
phase of such study in the sense that the primary determination of heterogeneity
defined as non-homogeneous supposes a knowledge of the homogeneity that
delineates it by exclusion.


                       IV. Heterogeneous Social Existence
The entire problem of social psychology rests precisely upon that fact that it
must be brought to bear on a form that is not only difficult to study, but whose
existence has not yet been the object of a precise definition.
   The very term heterogeneous indicates that it concerns elements that arc
impossible to assimilate; this impossibility, which has a fundamental impact on
             THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM             U   141

social assimilation, likewise has an impact on scientific assimilation. These two
types of assimilation have a single structure: the object of science is to establish
the homogeneity of phenomena; that is, in a sense, one of the eminent functions
of homogeneity. Thus, the heterogeneous elements excluded from the latter are
excluded as well from the field of scientific considerations: as a rule, science
cannot know heterogeneous elements as such. Compelled to note the existence
of irreducible facts—of a nature as incompatible with its own homogeneity as
are, for example, born criminals with the social order—science finds itself de-
prived of any functional satisfaction (exploited in the same manner as a laborer
in a capitalist factory, used without sharing in the profits). Indeed, science is not
an abstract entity: it is constantly reducible to a group of men living the aspira-
tions inherent to the scientific process.
    In such conditions, the heterogeneous elements, at least as such, find them-
selves subjected to a de facto censorship: each time that they could be the object
of a methodical observation, the functional satisfaction is lacking; and without
some exceptional circumstances—like the intrusion of a satisfaction with a com-
pletely different origin—they cannot be kept within the field of consideration.
    The exclusion of heterogeneous elements from the homogeneous realm of
consciousness formally recalls the exclusion of the elements, described (by
psychoanalysis) as unconscious, which censorship excludes from the conscious
ego. The difficulties opposing the revelation of unconscious forms of existence
are of the same order as those opposing the knowledge of heterogeneous forms.
As will subsequently be made clear, these two kinds of forms have certain
properties in common and, without being able to elaborate immediately upon
this point, it would seem that the unconscious must be considered as one of the
aspects of the heterogeneous. If this conception is granted, given what we know
about repression, it is that much easier to understand that the incursions occa-
sionally made into the heterogeneous realm have not been sufficiently coordi-
nated to yield even the simple revelation of its positive and clearly separate exis-
tence.
    It is of secondary importance to indicate here that, in order to avoid the inter-
nal difficulties that have just been foreseen, it is necessary to posit the limits of
science’s inherent tendencies and to constitute a knowledge of the nonexplain-
able difference, which supposes the immediate access of the intellect to a body
of material prior to any intellectual reduction. Tentatively, it is enough to pre-
sent the facts according to their nature and, with a view to defining the term
heterogeneous, to introduce the following considerations:
     1. Just as, in religious sociology, mana and taboo designate forms restricted
to the particular applications of a more general form, the sacred, so may the
sacred itself be considered as a restricted form of the heterogeneous.
    Mana designates the mysterious and impersonal force possessed by individ-
uals such as kings and witch doctors. Taboo indicates the social prohibition of
              142 [ THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

contact pertaining, for example, to cadavers and menstruating women. Given
the precise and limited facts to which they refer, these aspects of hererogeneous
life are easy to define. However, an explicit understanding of the sacred, whose
field of application is relatively vast, presents considerable difficulties.
Durkheim faced the impossibility of providing it with a positive scientific defini-
tion: he settled for characterizing the sacred world negatively as being absolutely
heterogeneous compared to the profane.* It is nevertheless possible to admit that
the sacred is known positively, at least implicitly (since the word is commonly
used in every language, that usage supposes a signification perceived by the
whole of mankind). This implicit knowledge of a heterogeneous value permits
a vague but positive character to be communicated to its description. Yet it can
be said that the heterogeneous world is largely comprised of the sacred world,
and that reactions analogous to those generated by sacred things are provoked
by heterogeneous things that are not, strictly speaking, considered to be sacred.
These reactions are such that the heterogeneous thing is assumed to be charged
with an unknown and dangerous force (recalling the Polynesian mana) and that
a certain social prohibition of contact (taboo) separates it from the homogeneous
or ordinary world (which corresponds to the profane world in the strictly reli-
gious opposition);
    2. Beyond the properly sacred things that constitute the common realm of
religion or magic, the heterogeneous world includes everything resulting from
unproductive expenditure® (sacred things themselves form part of this whole).
This consists of everything rejected by homogeneous society as waste or as
superior transcendent value. Included are the waste products of the human body
and certain analogous matter (trash, vermin, etc.); the parts of the body; per-
sons, words, or acts having a suggestive erotic value; the various unconscious
processes such as dreams    or neuroses;   the numerous elements or social forms
that homogeneous society is powerless to assimilate: mobs, the warrior, aristo-
cratic and impoverished classes, different types of violent individuals or at least
those who refuse the rule (madmen, leaders, poets, etc.);
    3. Depending upon the person hererogenecus elements will provoke affective
reactions of varying intensity, and it is possible to assume that the object of any
affective reaction is necessarily heterogeneous (if not generally, at least with
regard to the subject). There is sometimes attraction, sometimes repulsion, and
in cerain circumstances, any object of repulsion can become an object of attrac-
tion and vice versa;
    4. Violence, excess, delirium, madness characterize heterogeneous elements
to varying degrees: active, as persons or mobs, they result from breaking the
laws of social homogeneity. This characteristic does not appropriately apply to
inert objects, yet the latter do present a certain conformity with extreme emo-
tions (if it is possible to speak of the violent and excessive nature of a decompos-
ing body);
              THE   PSYCHOLOGICAL    STRUCTURE    OF   FASCISM   [J   143


   5. The reality of heterogeneous elements is not of the same order as that of
homogeneous elements. Homogeneous reality presents itself with the abstract
and neutral aspect of strictly defined and identified objects (basically, it is the
specific reality of solid objects). Heterogeneous reality is that of a force or
shock. It presents itself as a charge, as a value, passing from one object to an-
other in a more or less abstract fashion, almost as if the change were taking place
not in the world of objects but only in the judgments of the subject. The preced-
ing aspect nevertheless does not signify that the observed facts are to be consid-
ered as subjective: thus, the action of the objects of erotic activity is manifestly
rooted in their objective nature. Nonetheless, in a disconcerting way, the subject
does have the capacity to displace the exciting value of one element onto an
analogous or neighboring one.® In heterogeneous reality, the symbols charged
with affective value thus have the same importance as the fundamental elements,
and the part can have the same value as the whole. It is easy to note that, since
the structure of knowledge for a homogeneous reality is that of science, the
knowledge of a heterogeneous reality as such is to be found in the mystical think-
ing of primitives and in dreams: it is identical to the structure of the uncon-
scious;’
    6. In summary, compared to everyday life, heterogeneous existence can be
represented as something other, as incommensurate, by charging these words
with the positive value they have in affective experience.

Examples of Heterogeneous Elements
    If these suggestions are now brought to bear upon actual elements, the fascist
leaders are incontestably part of heterogeneous existence. Opposed to demo-
cratic politicians, who represent in different countries the platitude inherent to
homogeneous society, Mussolini and Hitler immediately stand out as something
other. Whatever emotions their actual existence as political agents of evolution
provokes, it is impossible to ignore the force that situates them above men,
parties, and even laws: a force that disrupts the regular course of things, the
peaceful but fastidious homogeneity powerless to maintain itself (the fact that
laws are broken is only the most obvious sign of the transcendent, heterogeneous
nature of fascist action). Considered not with regard to its external action but
with regard to its source, the force of a leader is analogous to that exerted in
hypnosis.® The affective flow that unites him with his followers—which takes
the form of a moral identification® of the latter with the one they follow (and
reciprocally)—is a function of the common consciousness of increasingly violent
and excessive energies and powers that accumulate in the person of the leader
and through him become widely available. (But this concentration in a single
person intervenes as an element that sets the fascist formation apart within the
heterogeneous realm: by the very fact that the affective effervescence leads to
unity, it constitutes, as authority, an agency directed against men; this agency
               144 OO THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

is an existence for itself before being useful; an existence for itself distinct from
that of a formless uprising where for itself signifies ‘‘for the men in revolt.’’)
This monarchy, this absence of all democracy, of all fraternity in the exercise
of power—forms that do not exist only in Italy or Germany—indicates that the
immediate natural needs of men     must be renounced,     under constraint, in favor
of a transcendent principle that cannot be the object of an exact explanation.
   In a quite different sense, the lowest strata of society can equally be described
as heterogeneous, those who generally provoke repulsion and can in no case be
assimilated by the whole of mankind.      In India, these impoverished classes are
considered untouchable, meaning that they are characterized by the prohibition
of contact analogous to that applied to sacred things. It is true that the custom
of countries in advanced civilizations is less ritualistic and that the quality of
being untouchable is not necessarily hereditary; nevertheless, being destitute is
all it takes in these countries to create between the self and others—who consider
themselves the expression of normal man—a nearly insuperable gap. The
nauseating forms of dejection provoke a feeling of disgust so unbearable that it
is improper to express or even to make allusion to it. By all indications, in the
psychological order of disfiguration, the material poverty of man has excessive
consequences. And, in the event that fortunate men have not undergone homo-
geneous reduction (which opposes aÎegal justification to poverty), if we except
those shameless attempts at evasion such as charitable pity, the hopeless violence
of the reactions immediately takes on the form of a challenge to reason.


        V. The Fundamental Dualism of the Heterogeneous World
The two preceding examples, taken from the broader domain of heterogeneity,
and not from the sacred domain proper, nevertheless do present the specific
traits of the latter. This 1s readily apparent with reference to the leaders who are
manifestly treated by their followers as sacred persons. It is much less evident
with reference to forms of poverty that are not the object of any cult.
    But the revelation that such vile forms are compatible with the sacred charac-
ter precisely marks the decisive headway made in the knowledge of the sacred
as well as in that of the heterogeneous realm. The notion of the duality of sacred
forms is one of the conclusive findings of social anthropology: these forms must
be distributed among two opposing classes: pure and impure (in primitive reli-
gions certain impure things—menstrual blood, for example—are no less sacred
than the divine nature; the awareness of this fundamental duality has persisted
until relatively recent times: in the Middle Ages, the word sacer was used to
designate a shameful illness—syphilis—and the deeper meaning of this usage
was still intelligible.) The theme of sacred poverty—impure and untouchable—
constitutes precisely the negative pole of a region characterized by the opposi-
tion of two extreme forms: in a certain sense, there is an identity of opposites
              THE    PSYCHOLOGICAL   STRUCTURE    OF FASCISM ([   145


between glory and dejection, between exalted and imperative (higher) forms and
impoverished (lower) forms. This opposition splits the whole of the hetero-
geneous world and joins the already defined characteristics of heterogeneity as
a fundamental element. (Undifferentiated heterogeneous forms are, in fact,
relatively rare—at least in developed societies—and the analysis of the internal
heterogeneous social structure is almost entirely reduced to that of the opposition
between two contrary terms.)


                    VI. The Imperative Form of Heterogeneous
                             Existence: Sovereignty
Heterogeneous fascist action belongs to the entire set of higher forms. It makes
an appeal to sentiments traditionally defined as exalted and noble and tends to
constitute authority as an unconditional principle, situated above any utilitarian
judgment.
    Obviously, the use of the words higher, noble, exalted does not imply en-
dorsement. Here these qualities simply designate that something belongs to a
category historically defined as higher, noble, or exalted: such particularized or
novel conceptions can only be considered in relation to the traditional concep-
tions from which they derive; they are, furthermore, necessarily hybrid, without
any far-reaching effect, and it is doubtless preferable, if possible, to abandon
any representation of this order (for what admissible reasons would a man want
to be noble, similar to a representative of the medieval,    military caste and ab-
solutely not ignoble, that is to say similar, in accordance with the judgment of
history, to a man whose material destitution would have altered his human char-
acter, made him something other?).
    Having formulated this reservation, the meaning of higher values must be
clarified with the help of traditional qualifiers. Superiority (imperative sover-
eignty)'® designates the entire set of striking aspects—affectively determining
attraction or repulsion—characteristic of different human situations in which it
is possible to dominate and even to oppress one’s fellows by reason of their age,
physical weakness, legal status, or simply of their necessity to place themselves
under the control of one person: specific situations correspond to diverse cir-
cumstances,   that of the father with regard to his children, that of the military
leader with regard to the army and the civilian population, that of the master
with regard to the slave, that of the king with regard to his subjects. To these
real situations must be added mythological situations whose exclusively ficti-
tious nature facilitates a condensation of the aspects characteristic of superiority.
    The simple fact of dominating one’s fellows implies the heterogeneity of the
master, insofar as he is the master: to the extent that he refers to his nature, to
his personal quality, as the justification of his authority, he designates his nature
as something other, without being able to account for it rationally. But not only
               146 [J THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

as something other with regard to the rational domain of the common denomina-
tor and the equivalent: the heterogeneity of the master is no less opposed to that
of the slave. If the heterogeneous nature of the slave is akin to that of the filth
in which his material situation condemns him to live, that of the master is formed
by an act excluding all filth: an act pure in direction but sadistic in form.
    In human terms, the ultimate imperative value presents itself in the form of
royal or imperial authority in which cruel tendencies and the need, characteristic
of all domination, to realize and idealize order are manifest in the highest
degree. This double character is no less present in fascist authority, but it is only
one of the numerous forms of royal authority, the description of which consti-
tutes the foundation of any coherent description of fascism.
    In opposition to the impoverished existence of the oppressed, political sover-
eignty initially presents itself as a clearly differentiated sadistic activity. In indi-
vidual psychology, it is rare for the sadistic tendency not to be associated with
a more or less manifest masochistic tendency. But as each tendency is normally
represented in society by a distinct agency, the sadistic attitude can be mani-
fested by an imperative person to the exclusion of any corresponding maso-
chistic attitudes. In this case, the exclusion of the filthy forms that serve as the
object of the cruel act is not accompanied by the positioning of these forms as
a value and, consequently, no erotic activity can be associated with the cruelty.
The erotic elements themselves are rejected at the same time as every filthy
object and, as in a great number of religious attitudes, sadism attains a brilliant
purity. The differentiation can be more or less complete—individually, sover-
eigns have been able to live power in part as an orgy of blood—but, on the
whole, within the heterogeneous domain, the imperative royal form has histor-
ically effected an exclusion of impoverished and filthy forms sufficient to permit
a connection with homogeneous forms at a certain level.
    In fact, as a rule, homogeneous society excludes every heterogeneous ele-
ment, whether filthy or noble; the modalities of the operation vary as much as
the nature of each excluded element. For homogeneous society, only the re-
jection of impoverished forms has a constant fundamental value (such that the
least recourse to the reserves of energy represented by these forms requires an
operation as dangerous as subversion); but, given that the act of excluding
impoverished forms necessarily associates homogeneous forms with imperative
forms, the latter can no longer be purely and simply rejected. To combat the
elements most incompatible with it, homogeneous society uses free-floating
imperative forces; and, when it must choose the very object of its activity (the
existence for itself in the service of which it must necessarily place itself) from
the domain that it has excluded, the choice inevitably falls on those forces that
have already proved most effective.
   The inability of homogeneous society to find in itself a reason for being and
                 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL      STRUCTURE    OF FASCISM    0   147

acting is what makes it dependent upon imperative forces, just as the sadistic
hostility of sovereigns toward the impoverished population is what allies them
with any formation seeking to maintain the latter in a state of oppression.
    A complex situation results from the royal person’s modalities of exclusion:
since the king is the object in which homogeneous society has found its reason
for being, maintaining this relationship demands that he conduct himself in such
a way that the homogeneous society can exist for him. In the first place, this
requirement bears upon the fundamental heterogeneity of the king, guaranteed
by numerous prohibitions of contract (taboos); this heterogeneity, however, is
impossible to keep in a free state. In no case may heterogeneity receive its law
from without, but its spontaneous movement can be fixed, at least tendentially,
once and for all. Thus, the destructive passion (sadism) of the imperative agency
is as a rule exclusively directed either toward foreign societies or toward the
impoverished classes, toward all those external or internal elements hostile to
homogeneity.
    Historically, royal power is the form that results from such a situation. As
for its positive function, a determining role is reserved for the very principle of
unification, actually carried out in a group of individuals whose affective choice
bears upon a single heterogeneous object. A shared orientation has, in itself, a
constitutive value: it presupposes—vaguely, it is true—the imperative character
of the object. Unification, the principle of homogeneity, 1s only a tendential fact,
incapable of finding in itself a motive for requiring and imposing its existence;
and,   in most    circumstances,   the recourse   to an external   requirement   has   the
value of a primary necessity. Yet, the pure having to be, the moral imperative,
requires being for itself, namely, the specific mode of heterogeneous existence.
But this existence precisely escapes the principle of having to be and can in no
case be subordinated to it: it immediately accedes to Being (in other words it
produces itself as the value being or not being and never as a value that has to
be). The complex form in which the resolution of this incompatibility culminates
poses the having to be of homogeneous existence in heterogeneous existences.
Thus, imperative heterogeneity not only represents a differentiated form with
regard to vague heterogeneity: it additionally supposes the structural modifica-
tion of the two parts, homogeneous and heterogeneous, in contact with one
another. On the one hand, the homogeneous formation akin to the royal agency,
the State, derives its imperative character from this agency and seems to attain
existence for itself by bringing about the barren and cold having to be of the
whole of homogeneous society. But the State is in reality only the abstract,
degraded form of the living having to be required, at the top, as an affective
attraction and royal agency: it is simply vague homogeneity become a constraint.
On the other hand, this mode of intermediary formation that characterizes the
State penetrates imperative existence through reaction; but, in the course of this
               148 (0 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM


introjection, the proper form of homogeneity becomes—this time for real—
existence for itself by denying itself: it becomes absorbed by heterogeneity and
destroys itself as strictly homogeneous from the fact that, having become the
negation of the principle of utility, it refuses all subordination. Although
profoundly penetrated by the reason of State, the king nevertheless does not
identify with the latter: he wholly maintains the separate character of divine
supremacy. He is exempt from the specific principle of homogeneity, the
compensation of rights and duties constituting the formal law of the State: the
king’s rights are unconditional.
    There is hardly any need to suggest at this point that the possibility of such
affective formations has brought about the infinite subjugation that degrades
most forms of human life (much more so than abuses of power which, further-
more, are themselves reducible—insofar as the force in play is necessarily
social—to imperative formations). If sovereignty is now considered in its
tendential form—such as it has been lived historically by the subject to whom
it owes its attractive value—yet independently of any particular reality, its nature
appears, in human terms, to be the noblest—exalted to majesty—, pure in the
midst of the orgy, beyond the reach of human infirmities. It constitutes the
region formally exempt from self-interested intrigues to which the oppressed
subject refers as to an empty but pure satisfaction. (In this sense the constitution
of royal nature above an inadmissible reality recalls the fictions justifying eternal
life.) As a tendential form, it fulfills the ideal of society and the course of things
(in the subject’s mind, this function is expressed naively: if the king only
knew . . . ). At the same time it is strict authority. Situated above homo-
geneous society, as well as above the impoverished populace or the aristocratic
hierarchy that emanates from it, it requires the bloody repression of what is con-
trary to it and becomes synonymous in its split-off form with the heterogeneous
foundations of the law: it is thus both the possibility of and the requirement for
collective unity; it is in the royal orbit that the State and its functions of coercion
and adaption are elaborated; the homogeneous reduction develops, both as
destruction and foundation, to the benefit of royal greatness.
     Posing itself as the principle for the association of innumerable elements,
royal power develops spontaneously as an imperative and destructive force
against every other imperative form that could be opposed to it. It thereby mani-
fests, at the top, the fundamental tendency and principle of all authority: the
reduction to a personal entity, the individualization of power. While impover-
 ished existence is necessarily produced as a multitude and homogeneous society
as a reduction to the common denominator, the imperative agency—the founda-
tion of oppression—necessarily develops along the lines of a reduction to a unit
 in the form of a human being excluding the very possibility of a peer, in other
words, as a radical form of exclusion requiring avidity.
              THE PSYCHOLOGICAL      STRUCTURE OF FASCISM       L] 149

                        VII. Tendential    Concentration

This tendency toward concentration appears to be in contradiction, it is true,
with the coexistence of distinct domains of power: the domain of royal sover-
eignty is different from military power and from the domain of religious author-
ity. But taking note of this coexistence is precisely what draws attention to the
composite character of royal power, in which it is easy to find the constitutive
elements of the other two powers, the religious and the military.""
    It thus becomes apparent that royal sovereignty should not be considered as
a simple element having its own autonomous source, such as the army or the
religious organization: it is exactly (and furthermore uniquely) the actualized
concentration of these two elements formed in two different directions. The
constant rebirth of military and religious powers in a pure state has never modi-
fied the principle of their tendential concentration in the form of a single sover-
eignty: even the formal refusal of Christianity has not prevented—to use vulgar
symbolic terminology—the cross from lying on the steps of the throne with the
saber.
    Considered historically, this concentration can be achieved spontaneously:
the head of the army succeeds in having himself crowned king through the use
of force, or the established king takes hold of military power (in Japan, the
emperor recently actualized this form, without, it is true, his own initiative hav-
ing played a determining role). But each time, even in the case where royalty
is usurped, the possibility of the uniting of powers depended upon their funda-
mental affinities and especially upon their tendential concentration.
    The consideration of the principles governing these facts obviously becomes
crucial from the moment that fascism renews their historical existence, that is,
once again unites military and religious authority to effect a total oppression. (In
this regard, it can be stated—without prejudicing any other political judgment—
that any unlimited actualization of imperative forms amounts to a negation of
humanity as a value that depends upon the play of internal oppositions.) Like
Bonapartism, fascism (which etymologically signifies uniting, concentration) is
no more than an acute reactivation of the latent sovereign agency, but with a
character in a sense purified by the fact that paramilitary groups substituted for
the army in the constitution of power immediately have that power as an object.


                VIII. The Army and the Heads of the Army
As a rule, the army exists functionally because of war, and its psychological
structure is entirely reducible to the exercise of that function. Thus, imperative
character does not directly result from the social importance linked to the mate-
rial power of controlling weapons: its internal organization—discipline and
hierarchy—are what make it preeminently a noble society.
               150 O THE PSYCHOLOGICAL          STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

    Obviously, the nobility of arms initially supposes an intense heterogeneity:
discipline and hierarchy are themselves but forms and not the foundations of
heterogeneity, bloodshed, carnage, and death alone are commensurate with the
fundamental nature of weapons. But the ambiguous horror of war still has only
a base heterogeneity (at best undifferentiated). The exalted, exalting control of
weapons supposes the affective unification necessary to their cohesion, that is,
to their effective value.
    The affective character of this unification is manifest in the form of the sol-
dier’s attachment to the head of the army: it implies that each soldier equates
the latter’s glory with his own. This process is the intermediary through which
disgusting slaughter is radically transformed into its opposite, glory—namely,
into a pure and intense attraction. The glory of the chief essentially constitutes
a sort of affective pole opposed to the nature of the soldiers. Even independently
of their horrible occupation, the soldiers belong as a rule to a vile segment of
the population; divested of its uniforms and wearing ordinary clothing, a profes-
sional army of the eighteenth century would have looked like a wretched popu-
lace. But even the elimination of enlistments from the lower classes would fail
to change the deeper structure of the army; this structure would continue to base
affective organization upon the social infamy of the soldiers. Human               beings
incorporated into the army are but negated elements, negated with a kind of rage
(a sadism) manifest in the tone of each command, negated by the parade, by the
uniform, and by the geometric regularity of cadenced movements. The chief,
insofar as he is imperative, is the incarnation of this violent negation. His inti-
mate nature, the nature of his glory, is constituted by an imperative act that
annuls the wretched populace (which constitutes the army) as such (in the same
way that the slaughter 1s annulled as such).
    In social psychology, this imperative negation generally appears as the char-
acteristic of action; in other words, every affirmed social action necessarily
takes the unified psychological form of sovereignty; every lower form, every
ignominy, being by definition passive, is transformed into its opposite by the
simple fact of a transition to action. Slaughter, as an inert result, is ignoble; but,
shifted onto the social action that caused it, the ignoble heterogeneous value thus
established becomes noble (the action of killing and nobility are association by
indefectible historical ties): all it takes is for the action to affirm itself effectively
as such,   to assume   freely the imperative    form that constitutes it.
    This operation—the fact of assuming in complete freedom the imperative
character of action—is precisely what characterizes the chief. It becomes pos-
sible to grasp here in an explicit form the role played by unification (individuali-
zation) in the structural modifications that characterize superior heterogeneity.
Starting with formless and impoverished elements, the army, under the impera-
tive impulse, becomes organized and internally achieves a homogeneous form
on account of the negation directed at the disordered character of its elements:
             THE   PSYCHOLOGICAL     STRUCTURE    OF FASCISM   [   151


in fact, the mass that constitutes the army passes from a depleted and ruined exis-
tence to a purified geometric order, from formlessness to aggressive rigidity. In
actuality, this negated mass has ceased to be itself in order to become affectively
(‘“affectively’’ refers here to simple psychological behaviors, such as standing
at attention or marching double time) the chief’s thing and like a part of the chief
himself. A troop at attention is in a sense absorbed by the existence of the com-
mand and, thus, absorbed by the negation of itself. Standing at attention can be
analogically considered as a tropic movement (a kind of negative geotropism)
elevating not only the chief but all who follow his orders to the (geometrically)
regular form of imperative sovereignty. Thus the implied infamy of the soldiers
is only a basic infamy which, in uniform, is transformed into its opposite: order
and glamour. The mode of heterogeneity explicitly undergoes a thorough altera-
tion, completing the realization of intense homogeneity without a decrease of the
fundamental heterogeneity. In the midst of the population, the army retains the
distinction of being wholly other, but with a sovereignty linked to domination,
to the imperative and separate character that the chief transmits to his soldiers.
    Thus the dominant direction of the army, detached from its affective founda-
tions (infamy and slaughter), depends upon the contrary heterogeneity of honor
and duty incarnated in the person of the chief. (If the chief is not subordinate
to a real agency or to an idea, duty 1s incarnated in his person in the same way
as in that of the king.) Honor and duty, symbolically expressed by the geometry
of the parades, are the tendential forms that situate military existence above
homogeneous existence as imperative and as a pure reason for being. Having a
limited bearing on certain levels of action, these forms, in their properly military
aspect, are compatible with infinitely craven crimes, but they suffice to affirm
the exalted value of the army and to make the internal domination characterizing
its structure one of the fundamental elements of a supreme psychological author-
ity instituted above the subjugated society.
    Nevertheless, the immediate result of the power of the head of the army is
only an internal homogeneity independent of social homogeneity, whereas speci-
fic royal power exists only in relation to homogeneous society. The integration
of military power into social power therefore supposes a structural change: it
supposes the acquisition of modalities characteristic of royal power in relation
to the administration of the State, as they were described in relation to this
power.


                              IX. Religious Power

It is granted in an implicit and vague manner that holding military power has
been sufficient to exert a general domination. Nevertheless, with the exception
of colonizations, which extend a preestablished power, examples of long-
lasting, exclusively military dominations are hard to find. In fact, simple mate-
              152 {] THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM


rial armed force is incapable of founding any power: in the first place, such force
depends on the internal attraction exerted by the chief (money is insufficient to
constitute an army). And when the chief wants to use the force at his disposal
to dominate society, he must further acquire the elements of an external attrac-
tion (of a religious attraction valid for the entire population).
    It 1s true that the latter elements are sometimes at the disposal of force, yet,
as the origin of royal power, military attraction probably has no primacy over
religious attraction. To the extent that it is possible to formulate a valid judgment
about the distant past of mankind, it seems fairly clear that religion—not the
army—is the source of social authority. Furthermore, the introduction of hered-
ity regularly marks the predominance of a religious form of power: it can rely
upon its bloodlines, whereas military power depends first of all on personal
value.
    Unfortunately, it is difficult to ascribe a specific meaning to that which, in
the blood or in the aspects of royalty, is characteristically religious: here one
essentially confronts the bare and unlimited form of undifferentiated hetero-
geneity, before any of its perceptible elements (ones that can be made explicit)
have been fixed by a still vague direction. This direction does exist nonetheless,
but, in every causal state, the structural modifications that it introduces leave the
field to a free projection of general affective forms, such as dread or sacred
attraction. Furthermore, structural modifications are not what are immediately
transmitted through physiological contact in heredity or by sacred rites, but
rather a fundamental heterogeneity.
    The (implicit) signification of the purely religious royal character can only
be attained to the extent that its origin and structure appear to be shared with
those of a divine nature. Though it is impossible, in such a cursory presentation,
to present all of the affective movements involved in the establishment of
mythical authorities (culminating in the positioning of a fictitious supreme
authority), a simple juxtaposition is amply revealing. Unequivocal facts (identi-
fications with the divine, mythical genealogies, the Roman or Shintoist imperial
cults, the Christian theory of divine right) correspond to the shared structure of
the two formations. One the whole, the king is considered in one form or another
to be an emanation of a divine nature, along with everything that the principle
of emanation entails in the way of identity when dealing with heterogeneous
elements.
   The notable structural modifications that characterize the evolution of the
representation of the divine—starting with free and irresponsible violence—
simply makes explicit those characterizing the formation of the royal nature. In
both cases, the position of the sovereign is what directs the alteration of the
heterogeneous structure. In both cases, we witness a concentration of attributes
and forces; but, in the case of God, since the forces that he represents are only
composed    in a fictitious being (not subject to the limitation of having to be
             THE PSYCHOLOGICAL         STRUCTURE OF FASCISM        L   153


realized), it was possible to yield more perfect forms, more purely logical
schemata.
    The supreme being of theologians and philosophers represents the most
profound introjection of the structure characteristic of homogeneity into hetero-
geneous existence: in his theological aspect, God preeminently fulfills the sover-
eign form. However, the counterpart to this possibility is implied by the ficti-
tious character   of divine   existence,   whose   heterogeneous   nature,   lacking   the
limitative value of reality, can be overlooked in a philosophical conception
(reduced to a formal affirmation that is in no way lived). In the order of free
intellectual speculation, the idea can be substituted for God as supreme existence
and power; this implies the admittedly partial revelation of a relative hetero-
geneity of the Idea (such as occurred when Hegel raised the Idea above the
simple having to be).


             X. Fascism as the Sovereign Form of Sovereignty

Stirring up such apparently anachronistic phantoms would surely be senseless
if fascism had not, before our very eyes, reappropriated and reconstituted from
the bottom up—starting, as it were, with nothing—the very process described
above for the establishment of power. Until our times, there had only been a
single historical example of the sudden formation of a total power, namely, the
Islamic Khalifat. While both military and religious, it was principally royal,
relying upon no prior foundation. Islam, a form comparable to fascism in its
meager human wealth, did not even have recourse to an established nation, much
less a constituted State. But it must be recognized that, for fascist movements,
the existing State has first been something to conquer, then a means or a frame ,*
and that the integration of the nation does not change the schema of their forma-
tion. Just like early Islam, fascism represents the constitution of a total hetero-
geneous power whose manifest origin is to be found in the prevailing effer-
vescence.
    In the first place, fascist power is characterized by a foundation that 1s both
religious and military, in which these two habitually distinct elements cannot be
separated: it thus presents itself from the outset as an accomplished concentra-
tion.
    It is true, however, that the military aspect is the predominant one. The
affective relations that closely associate (identify) the leader to the member of
the party (as they have already been described) are generally analogous to those
uniting a chief to his soldiers. The imperative presence of the leader amounts
to a negation of the fundamental revolutionary effervescence that he taps; the
revolution, which is affirmed as a foundation is, at the same time, fundamentally
negated from the moment that internal domination is militarily exerted on the
militia. But this internal domination is not directly subordinated to real or pos-
              154 [J THE PSYCHOLOGICAL       STRUCTURE OF FASCISM


sible acts of war: it essentially poses itself as the middle term of an external
domination of society and of the State, as the middle term of a total imperative
value. Thus, qualities characteristic of the two dominations (internal and exter-
nal, military and religious) are simultaneously implied: qualities derived from
the introjected homogeneity, such as duty, discipline, and obedience; and qual-
ities derived from the essential heterogeneity, imperative violence, and the posi-
tioning of the chief as the transcendent object of collective affectivity. But the
religious value of the chief is really the fundamental (if not formal) value of
fascism, giving the activity of the militiamen its characteristic affective tonality,
distinct from that of the soldier in general. The chief as such 1s in fact only the
emanation of a principle that is none other than that of the glorious existence
of a nation raised to the value of a divine force (which, superseding every other
conceivable consideration, demands not only passion but ecstasy from its partici-
pants). Incarnated in the person of the chief (in Germany, the properly religious
term, prophet, has sometimes been used), the nation thus plays the same role
that Allah, incarnated in the person of Mahomet or the Khalif,'* plays for Islam.
     Fascism therefore appears first of all as a concentration and so to speak con-
densation of power!“ (a meaning actually indicated in the etymological value of
the term). This general signification must furthermore be accepted in several
ways. The accomplished uniting of imperative forces takes place at the top, but
the process leaves no social faction inactive. In fundamental opposition to
socialism, fascism is characterized by the uniting of classes. Not that classes
conscious of their unity have adhered to the regime, but because expressive
elements of each class have been represented in the deep movements of ad-
herence that led to the seizing of power. Here the specific type of unification
is actually derived from properly military affectivity, which is to say that the
representative elements of the exploited classes have been included in the affec-
tive process only through the negation of their own nature (just as the social
nature of a recruit is negated by means of uniforms and parades). This process,
which blends the different social formations from the bottom up, must be under-
stood as a fundamental process whose scheme is necessarily given in the very
formation of the chief, who derives his profound meaning from the fact of hav-
 ing shared the dejected and impoverished life of the proletariat. But, as in the
case of military organization, the affective value characteristic of impoverished
existence is only displaced and transformed into its opposite; and it is its inor-
dinate scope that gives the chief and the whole of the formation the accent of
violence without which no army or fascism could be possible.


                              XI.   The   Fascist State

Fascism’s close ties with the impoverished classes profoundly distinguish this
formation from classical royal society, which 1s characterized by a more or less
decisive loss of contact with the lower classes. But, forming in opposition to the
               THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM                    (    155


established royal unification (the forms of which dominate society from too far
above), the fascist unification is not simply a uniting of powers from different
origins and a symbolic uniting of classes: it is also the accomplished uniting of
the heterogeneous elements with the homogeneous elements, of sovereignty in
the strictest sense with the State.
    As a uniting, fascism 1s actually opposed as much to Islam as it is to tradi-
tional monarchy. In fact Islam was created from nothing, and that is why a form
such   as the State,    which    can only   be the     result of a long historical process,
played no role in its immediate constitution; on the contrary, the existing State
 served from the outset as a frame for the entire fascist process of organic organi-
 zation. This characteristic aspect of fascism permitted Mussolini to write that
 ‘“everything is in the State,”’ that ‘‘nothing human or spiritual exists nor a
fortiori does it have any existence outside of the State.’’!® But this does not
 necessarily imply an identity of the State and the imperative force that dominates
the whole of society. Mussolini himself, who leaned toward a kind of Hegelian
divinization   of the   State,   acknowledges        in willfully   obscure   terms   a distinct
principle of sovereignty that he alternatively designates as the people, the nation,
and the superior personality, but that must be identified with the Fascist forma-
tion itself and its leader: ‘“if the people . . . signifies the idea . . . that is
incarnated in the people as the will of a few or even of a single person . . . It
has to do,’’ he writes,     ‘‘neither with race nor with a determined geographical
region, but with a grouping that is historically perpetuated, of a multitude uni-
fied by an idea that is a will to existence and to power: it is a self-consciousness,
a personality.’’'® The term personality must be understood as individualization,
a process leading to Mussolini himself, and when he adds that ‘‘this superior
personality is the nation as State. It is not the nation that creates the
State . . . ,”’'7 it must be understood that he has: 1) substituted the principle
of the sovereignty of the individualized fascist formation for the old democratic
principle of the sovereignty of the nation; 2) laid the groundwork for a conclu-
sive interpretation of the sovereign agency and the State.
    National Socialist Germany—which, unlike Italy (under the patronage of
Gentile), has not officially adopted Hegelianism and the theory of the State as
soul of the world—has not been afflicted with the theoretical difficulties resulting
from the necessity of officially articulating a principle of authority: the mystical
idea of race immediately affirmed itself as the imperative aim of the new fascist
society; at the same time it appeared to be incarnated in the person of the Führer
and his followers. Even though the conception of race lacks an objective base,
it 1s nonetheless subjectively grounded, and the necessity of maintaining the
racial value above all others obviated the need for a theory that made the State
the principle of all value. The example of Germany thus demonstrates that the
identity established by Mussolini between the State and the sovereign form of
value is not necessary to a theory of fascism.
    The fact that Mussolini did not formally distinguish the heterogeneous
               156 J THE PSYCHOLOGICAL        STRUCTURE OF FASCISM

agency, the action of which he caused to penetrate deeply into the State, can
equally be interpreted as an absolute seizure of the State and as a strained adapta-
tion of the sovereign agency to the necessities of a regime of homogeneous pro-
duction. It is in the development of these two reciprocal processes that fascism
and the reason of the State came to appear identical. Nevertheless, the forms of
life rigorously conserve a fundamental opposition when they maintain a radical
duality of principles in the very person of the one holding power: the president
of the Italian council and the German chancellor represent forms of activity
radically distinct from those of the Duce or the Fiihrer. Further, these two fig-
ures derive their fundamental power not from their official function in the State,
like other prime ministers, but from the existence of a fascist party and from
their personal position at the head of that party. In conjunction with the duality
of heterogeneous and homogeneous forms, this evidence of the deep roots of
power precisely maintains the unconditional supremacy of the heterogeneous
form from the standpoint of the principle of sovereignty.


                XII.   The   Fundamental     Conditions   of Fascism

As has already been indicated, heterogeneous processes as a whole can only
enter into play once the fundamental homogeneity of society (the apparatus of
production) has become dissociated because of its internal contradictions.
Further,   it can be stated that, even though    it generally   occurs   in the blindest
fashion, the development of heterogeneous forces necessarily comes to signify
a solution to the problem posed by the contradictions of homogeneity. Once in
power, developed heterogeneous forces have at their disposal the means of co-
ercion necessary to resolve the differences that had arisen between previously
irreconcilable elements. But it goes without saying that, at the end of a move-
ment that excludes all subversion, the thrust of these resolutions will have been
consistent with the general direction of the existing homogeneity, namely, with
the interests of the capitalists.
    The change resides in the fact that, having had recourse to fascist hetero-
geneity, these interests, from the moment of crisis on, are those of a group
opposed to privately owned enterprises. As a result, the very structure of capital-
ism—the principle of which had been that of a spontaneous homogeneity of pro-
duction based on competition, a de facto coincidence of the interests of the group
of producers with the absolute freedom of each enterprise—finds itself pro-
foundly altered. The awareness, developed in some German capitalists, of the
peril to which this freedom subjected them in a critical period, must naturally
be placed at the origin of the effervescence and triumph of National-Socialism.
However, it is evident that this awareness did not yet exist for Italian capitalists
who,   from the moment       of the march   on Rome,   were exclusively    preoccupied
with the irresolvability of their conflicts with the workers. It thus appears that
               THE PSYCHOLOGICAL      STRUCTURE OF FASCISM        O   157

the unity of fascism is located in its actual psychological structure and not in the
economic conditions that serve as its base. (This does not contradict the fact that
a general logical development of the economy retroactively provides the differ-
ent fascisms with a common economic signification that they share, to be sure,
with the potitical activity—absolutely foreign to fascism in the strictest sense—of
the current government of the United States.)
    Whatever the economic danger to which fascism responded, the awareness
of this danger and the need to avoid it actually represent an as yet empty desire,
which could be propped up by money. The realization of the force able to
respond to the desire and to utilize the available monies takes place only in the
heterogeneous region, and its possibility depends upon the actual structure of
that region:   on the whole,   it is possible to consider   this structure as variable
depending on whether the society is democratic or monarchical.
    Truly monarchial societies (as distinct from the adapted or bastardized polit-
ical forms represented by England today or prefascist Italy) are characterized by
the fact that a sovereign agency, having an ancient origin and an absolute form,
is connected to the existing homogeneity. The constant evolution of the constitu-
tive elements of this homogeneity can necessitate fundamental changes, but the
need for change can become represented internally only in an altered minority:
the whole of the homogeneous elements and the immediate principle of homo-
geneity remain committed to upholding the juridical forms and the existing
administrative framework guaranteed by the authority of the king; the authority
of the king coincides reciprocally with the upholding of these forms and this
framework. Thus the upper part of the heterogeneous region is both immobilized
and immobilizing, and only the lower part formed by the impoverished and op-
pressed classes is capable of entering into movement. But, for the latter, passive
and oppressed by definition, the fact of entering into movement represents a pro-
found alteration of their nature: in order to take part in a struggle against the
sovereign agency and the legal homogeneity oppressing them, the lower classes
must pass from a passive and diffuse state to a form of conscious activity; in
Marxist terms, these classes must become aware of themselves as a
revolutionary proletariat. This proletariat cannot actually be limited to itself: it
is in fact only a point of concentration for every dissociated social element that
has been banished to hererogeneity. It is even possible to say that such a point
of concentration exists in a sense prior to the formation of what must be called
the ‘‘conscious proletariat’’: the general description of the heterogeneous region
actually implies it be posited as a constitutive element of the structure of a whole
that includes not only imperative forms and impoverished forms but also
subversive forms. These subversive forms are none other than the lower forms
transformed with a view to the struggle against the sovereign forms. The
necessity inherent to subversive forms requires that what is low become high,
that what is high become low; this is the requirement in which the nature of
                 158 O THE PSYCHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE OF FASCISM


subversion is expressed. In the case where the sovereign forms of a society are
immobilized     and   bound,     the   diverse   elements   that   have     been    banished   to
heterogeneity as a result of social decomposition can only ally themselves with
the formations that result when the oppressed class becomes active: they are
necessarily dedicated to subversion. The faction of the bourgeoisie that has
become aware of the incompatibility with established social frameworks
becomes united against figures of authority and blends in with the effervescent
masses in revolt; and even in the period immediately following the destruction
of the monarchy, social movements continued to be governed by the initial
antiauthoritarian character of the revolution.
    But in a democratic society (at least when such a society is not galvanized
by the necessity of going to war) the heterogeneous imperative agency (nation
in republican forms, king in constitutional monarchies) 1s reduced to an atro-
phied existence, so that its destruction no longer appears to be a necessary condi-
tion of change. In such a situation, the imperative forms can even be considered
as a free field, open to all possibilities of effervescence and movement, just as
subversive forms are in a democracy. And when homogeneous society under-
goes a critical disintegration, the dissociated elements no longer necessarily
enter the orbit of subversive attraction: in addition there forms at the top an
imperative attraction that no longer immobilizes those who are subject to it. As
a rule,   until just recently,   this imperative    attraction only       exerted   itself in the
direction of restoration. It was thus limited beforehand by the prior nature of
the disappeared sovereignty, which most often implied a prohibitive loss of con-
tact between the sovereign agency and the lower classes (the only spontaneous
historical restoration, that of Bonapartism, must be put into relation with the
manifest popular sources of Bonapartist power). In France, it is true, some of
the constitutive forms of fascism were able to be elaborated in the formation—
but especially in the difficulties of the formation—of an imperative attraction
aimed at a dynastic restoration. The possibility of fascism nonetheless depended
upon the fact that a reversion to vanished sovereign forms was out of the ques-
tion in Italy, where the monarchy subsisted in a reduced state. Added to this
subsistence, it was precisely the insufficiency of the royal formation that neces-
sitated the formation of —and left the field open for—an entirely renewed imper-
ative attraction with a popular base. Under these new conditions (with regard
to the classical revolutionary dissociations in monarchical societies) the lower
classes no longer exclusively experience the attraction represented by socialist
subversion, and a military type of organization has in part begun to draw them
into the orbit of sovereignty. Likewise, the dissociated elements (belonging to
the middle or dominating classes) have found a new outlet for their efferves-
cence, and it is not surprising that, given the choice between subversive or
imperative solutions, the majority opted for the imperative.
    An unprecedented situation results from the possibility of this dual efferves-
cence. During the same period and in the same society, two competing revolu-
                THE   PSYCHOLOGICAL      STRUCTURE      OF FASCISM        U    159


tions, hostile to one another and to the established order, are being formed.
There develop at the same time two segments that share a common opposition
to the general dissociation of homogeneous society; this explains the numerous
connections between them and even a kind of profound complicity. Further-
more, independently of their common origin, the success of one of the furictions
implies that of the opposing faction through a certain play of balance: it can
cause it to occur (in particular, to the extent that fascism is an imperative re-
sponse to the growing threat of a working class movement) and should be con-
sidered, in most cases, as the sign of that occurrence. But, unless it is possible
to reestablish the disrupted homogeneity, it is evident that the simple formation
of a situation of this order dictates its own outcome in advance: an increase in
this effervescence is accompanied by a proportionate increase in the importance
of the dissociated elements (bourgeois and petty bourgeois) as compared to that
of the elements that had never been integrated (proletariat). Thus the chances
for a working class revolution, a liberating subversion of society, disappear to
the extent that revolutionary possibilities are affirmed.
     As a rule, it seems therefore that revolutionary movements that develop in
a democracy are hopeless, at least so long as the memory of the earlier
struggles against the royal authority has been attenuated and no longer neces-
sarily sets heterogeneous reactions in opposition to imperative forms. In fact,
it is evident that the situation of the major democratic powers, where the fate
of the Revolution is being played out, does not warrant the slightest confidence:
it is only the very nearly indifferent attitude of the proletariat that has permitted
these countries to avoid fascist formations. Yet it would be puerile to presume
to enclose the world in such a neat construction: from the outset, the mere con-
sideration   of affective   social   formations   reveals     the    immense         resources,   the
inexhaustible wealth of the forms particular to affective life. Not only are the
psychological situations of the democratic collectivities, like any human situa-
tion, transitory, but it remains possible to envision, at least as a yet imprecise
representation, forms of attraction that differ from those already in existence,
as different from present or even past communism as fascism is from dynastic
claims. A system of knowledge that permits the anticipation of the affective
soctal reactions that traverse the superstructure and perhaps even, to a certain
extent, do away with it, must be developed from one of these possibilities. The
fact of fascism, which has thrown the very existence of a workers’ movement
into question, clearly demonstrates what can be expected from a timely re-
course to reawakened affective forces. Unlike the situation during the period
of utopian socialism, morality and idealism are no more questions today than
they are in fascist forms. Rather, an organized understanding of the movements
in society, of attraction and repulsion, starkly presents itself as a weapon—at
this   moment   when    a vast convulsion    opposes,       not     so much    fascism     to com-
munism, but radical imperative forms to the deep subversion that continues to
pursue the emancipation of human lives.
                     160 O THE PSYCHOLOGICAL              STRUCTURE OF FASCISM


                                                  Notes

      1. This is obviously the principal shortcoming of an essay that will not fail to astonish and shock
those who are unfamiliar with French sociology, modern German philosophy (phenomenology), and
psychoanalysis. As a piece of information, it can nevertheless be insisted upon that the following
descriptions refer to actual experiences and that the psychological method used excludes any re-
course to abstraction.
     2.   The   words   homogeneous,   heterogeneous,   and   terms   derived   from   them   are   stressed   each
time they are taken in a sense particular to this essay.
      3. The most accomplished and expressive forms of social homogeneity are the sciences and the
technologies. The laws founded by the sciences establish relations of identity between the different
elements of an elaborated and measurable world. As for the technologies—which serve as a transi-
tion between production and science—, it is because of the very homogeneity of products and means
that they are opposed, in underdeveloped civilizations, to religion and magic (cf. Hubert and Mauss,
Esquisse d'une theorie générale de la magie, in Année sociologique 7, 1902-1903, p. 15).
      4. Formes élémentaires de la vie religieuse, 1912, p. 53. [The Elementary Forms of the Reli-
gious Life, trans. J. W. Swain (London: Allen and Unwin, 1926), p. 38. Tr.] Following his analysis,
Durkheim comes to identify the sacred and the social, but this identification necessitates the intro-
duction of an hypothesis and, whatever its scope, does not have the value of an immediately signifi-
cant definition (it actually represents the tendency of science to posit a homogeneous representation
in order to avoid the discernible presence of fundamentally heterogeneous elements).
      5. Cf. G. Bataille, ‘‘La notion de dépense,’’ in La critique sociale 7, January 1933, p. 302.
[‘*“The Notion of Expenditure,’’ above. Tr.]
      6. It appears that the displacements are produced under the same conditions as are Pavlov's con-
ditioned reflexes.
     7. On the primitive mind, cf. Levy-Bruhl, La mentalité primitive, Cassirer, Das mythische
Denken; on the unconscious, cf. Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams.
      8. On the affective relations of the followers to the leader and on the analogy with hypnosis,
cf. Freud, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the ‘‘Ego'’ (reprinted in Essais de psychanalyse,
1929).
      9. Cf. W. Robertson Smith, Lectures on the religion of the Semites, first series, The Funda-
mental Institutions, Edinburgh, 1889.
     10. The word sovereign comes from the lower Latin adjective superaneus meaning superior.
     11. Freud, in Group Psychology and the Analysis of the ‘‘Ego,’’ studied precisely the two func-
tions, military (army) and religious (church), in relation to the imperative form (unconscious) of
individual psychology that he called the Ego Ideal or the supergo. If one refers to the whole of the
elements brought together in the present study, that work, published in German in 1921, appears
as an essential introduction of the understanding of fascism.
    12. The modern Italian state is to a great extent a creation of fascism.
    13. Khalif etymologically signifies lieutenant (standing in for [tenant lieu]; the full title :s
‘‘lieutenant of the emissary of God.”
     14. Condensation of superiority, evidently related to a latent inferiority complex: such a complex
has equally strong roots in both Italy and Germany; this is why, even if fascism develops subse-
quently in regions having attained a complete sovereignty and the awareness of the sovereignty, it
is inconceivable that it could ever have been the autochthonous and specific product of such
countries.
     15. Mussolini, Enciclopedia italiana, article Fascismo.
    16. Ibid.
    17. Ibid.
Popular Front in the Street




Comrades:

    I will speak on the question of the Popular Front.
    However, 1 do not want to equivocate.
    We are not politicians.
    We want to express ourselves on the question of the Popular Front. It is
necessary for us to define our position in relation to a new set of forces that at
the present time dominates the political scene. But when we urge people to have
confidence in us, we are not thinking of the kind of confidence that would be
granted us because of more or less apt definitions derived, whether we wanted
it or not, from   political maneuvers.
    We will not try to add new maneuvers to the already complex and often diver-
gent maneuvers of the politicians.
    When we speak to those who want to hear us, we do not essentially address
their political finesse. The reactions we hope for from them are not calculations
of positions, nor are they new political alliances. What we hope for is of a differ-
ent nature.
    We see that the human masses are at the disposition of blind forces which
condemn them to inexplicable hecatombs, and which, while making them wait,
give them a morally empty and materially miserable life.
    What we have before our eyes is the horror of human impotence.
    We want to confront this horror directly. We address ourselves to the direct
and violent drives which,    in the minds of those who hear us, can contribute to


                                         161
                     162 [ POPULAR     FRONT IN THE STREET


the surge of power that will liberate men from the absurd swindlers who lead
them.
    We know that such drives have little to do with the phraseology invented to
maintain political positions. The will to be done with impotence implies, even
in our eyes, scorn for this phrasemongering; the taste for verbal agitation has
never passed for a mark of power.

    On this point, we want to express ourselves in a precise way.
    Derided humanity has already known surges of power. These chaotic but
implacable power surges dominate history and are known as Revolutions. On
many occasions entire populations have gone into the street and nothing has been
able to resist their force. It is an incontestable fact that if men have found them-
selves in the streets, armed,   in a mass uprising, carrying with them the tumult
of the total power of the people, it has never been the consequence of a narrow
and speciously defined political alliance.
   What drives the crowds to the street is the emotion directly aroused by strik-
ing events in the atmosphere of a storm, it is the contagious emotion that, from
house to house,   from suburb to suburb, suddenly turns a hesitating man       into a
frenzied being.

   It is evident that if, in general, insurrections had had to wait for learned dis-
putes between committees and the political offices of parties, then there never
would have been an insurrection.
    Still, as astonishing as this may seem, one frequently notes, among militant
revolutionaries, a complete lack of confidence in the spontaneous reactions of
the masses.
    The need to organize parties has resulted in unusual habits among the so-
called revolutionary agitators, who confuse the entry of the Revolution into the
street with their political platforms, with their well-groomed programs, with
their maneuvers in the halls of Congress.
    Amazingly, a distrust of the same order prevails against intellectuals. The
distrust of intellectuals only apparently contradicts the one that underestimates
the spontaneous movements of the masses.
    As much as they can, certain professional revolutionary activists would like
to eliminate, from the human tragedy that the Revolution necessarily is, all its
emotional resources, the brutal convulsion of the masses, the atmospherc
charged with hope, the rages and enthusiasms expressed in periods of crisis by
those who write.
    We are as far as we can be from the belief that a movement can do without
its leaders, as far as we can be from the belief that this leadership can do without
the resources of human knowledge contributed by the most recent advances of
human understanding. But first of all we must protest against everything that is
                      POPULAR FRONT IN THE STREET             ©     163

born in the poisoned atmosphere of professional congresses and committees, all
of which are at the mercy of hallway maneuvers.
   We do not think it possible to raise a political question without having a
debate. And for us having the debate means having it in the street, it means
having it where emotion can seize men and push them to the limit, without
meeting the eternal obstacles that result from the defense of old political
positions.
    If we are to speak of the Popular Front, we must first identify what holds us
firmly together, what links our origins to the emotions that constitute it, namely,
the existence of the Popular Front in the street.
    Comrades, we must say of the Popular Front that it was born on the Cours
de Vincennes   on the day     of February      12,   1934,   when         for the first time the
masses of workers gathered to demonstrate the strength of their opposition to
fascism.
    Most of us, comrades, were in the street that day and can recall the emotion
that overcame us when the Communist marchers, coming out of the rue des
Pyrénées, turned into the Cours de Vincennes and took up the entire width of
the street: this massive group was preceded by a line of a hundred workers,
shoulder to shoulder and arm in arm, marching with unprecedented slowness
and singing the /nternationale. Many among you, no doubt, can remember the
huge old bald worker, with a reddish face and heavy white moustache, who
walked slowly, one step at a time, in front of that moving human wall, holding
high a red flag.
    It was no longer a procession, nor anything poorly political; it was the curse
of the working people, and not only in its rage, IN ITS IMPOVERISHED
MAJESTY, which advanced, made greater by a kind of rending solemnity—by
the menace of slaughter still suspended at that moment over all of the crowd.
   Comrades,    at that   moment,   on   the   Cours    de   Vincennes,         the   Communist
masses marched in front of the Socialist masses, and a little later merged with
them through an 1dentical cry for unity of action. This was the period, however,
when, in L'Humanité, professional politicians indulged in precise definitions of
the situation: according to Marty, in an article whose delirium moreover must
nevertheless be acknowledged, they had shot not fascists but workers on the
Place de la Concorde.     For the entire editorial board of L 'Humanité,              Daladier’s
government then became a government of executioners, and unity of action con-
tinued to be impossible with the Socialist traitors. On this question, the Central
Committee of the party published, a few days after February 12, statements that
clearly indicated their refusal.
    This is how revolutionary activity can be expressed in the street with force
and at the same time with an incomparable instinctive certainty, when from the
poisoned atmosphere of committees and editorial offices nothing comes but
political directives testifying to a scandalous blindness.
                       164 1 POPULAR      FRONT IN THE STREET


    Political wrangling was again superseded by the reality of the street at the
time of the definitive formation of the Popular Front.
    The Popular Front was conceived by its founders as a defensive organization,
reuniting all the forces hostile to fascism. It is impossible not to see that its birth
coincided with the salvation of Stalin by the French Army. The grave, and per-
haps even tragic, situation of the Soviets engaged them in a Franco-Russian
political alliance, which then linked their interests to social conservatism in
France. Clearly, from the moment that Soviet security depends on the French
military forces, the Soviets cannot at the same time work to undermine these
forces. In the spirit of its Communist founders, the Popular Front’s goal was,
without a doubt, the maintenance of a nonfascist, but strong, France, thus at the
disposal of socially conservative elements.
   In a certain sense, the Popular Front meant nothing more than the revolution-
aries’   abandonment   of the anticapitalist offensive;   the move   to the defense of
antifascism; the move to the simple defense of democracy; the abandonment, at
the same time, of revolutionary defeatism.
    Now comrades, what can we think of this abandonment of the anticapitalist
offensive, at precisely the time when a great number of people, independently
of their political tendencies, agreed upon the disastrous character of the capitalist
system? From the revolutionary point of view, the abandonment of the anti-
capitalist offensive in the midst of the present crisis would represent the most
scandalous possible weakness; isn’t it incredible to leave to the worst slaves of
capitalism, to the fascistic Croix de feu lackeys of the de Wendels, the rallying
cry awaited by the anxious, disconcerted masses, the rallying cry to fight against
a capitalism despised by the vast majority of men?
    The default of the politicians thus would abandon the real world, the world
of tragic sufferings and hopes, to the degrading verbal comedy of barracks-room
thugs.
    And at the same time, while dread mounts from day to day before the immi-
nence of the physical extermination of men and human wealth, wouldn’t it be
incredible to anticipate a new conflict by giving the idea of antifascism a value
on the level of military struggle, when we know, meanwhile, that stupid impe-
rialism precisely engendered this fascism that we mean to fight while marching
in the ranks assigned to us by generals and industrial magnates.
    Comrades,   if human    reality,   or to be more   precise,   human   reality   in the
street—personally, it 1s in tying to it all the hope that stirs me that I use this term
‘“street,’’ which opposes life, real life, to the schemes as well as to the isolation
of the absurdly involuted individual—if human reality did not in every possible
way go beyond the mediocre conceptions and betrayals of conniving politicians,
then the Popular Front would not have, for any of us, the profound meaning that
it has acquired in the circumstances that we have lived and that we continue to
live.
                            POPULAR FRONT IN THE STREET         U   165

    Even today, while many people—rightly or wrongly—are claiming that the
Popular Front is falling apart at the top, that, beyond an antifascist defense it
will be incapable of setting forth a plan for concerted action essential to the exer-
cise of power, we continue to see growing among the masses who make up its
strength, who were in the street yesterday, who will invade the street tomorrow,
the agitation of the people’s omnipotence.
    Badly formed political conceptions have set these people in motion, but the
Popular Front does not depend on the will of its founders to work exactly for
their goals:   the Popular      Front   is above   all now   a movement,         an agitation,    a
crucible in which formerly separated political forces meld with an often tumul-
tuous effervescence.
    Now that the various social strata that constitute it have become conscious of
the strength they represent when reunited, this strength, going to their heads,
will attract them to each other and will break the chains meant to hold them.
    Therefore, when our comrades of the revolutionary Socialist left call for the
transformation of the defense against fascism into an anticapitalist offensive, of
the Popular Front into the Popular Front of combat, they are only expressing
the dynamic movement inherent in the makeup of forces in motion. Today it is
not advisable for anyone to be opposed to the rise of the all-powerful populace.
   We   must    not    be    unaware,   however,    that difficulties     must   be   overcome,
before the offensive can be realized, without which the party will find itself in
the hands of those who are still criminally talking of the ‘‘lost victory.’’
    We do not believe that organized parties should disappear, but we do not be-
lieve either that the masses can attain the power to put an end to domination by
capitalist lackeys unless a movement appears that can escape the sterilizing con-
trol of these parties.
    We must above all recognize as critical the period following the formation
of a government that, without being the direct expression of the Popular Front,
could nevertheless be brought to power by the parliamentarians who belonged
to this Front.
    From time to time the spokesmen of the Popular Front themselves are led to
make statements that show an extreme uneasiness on this point. Concerning a
Popular Front government, Pierre Jérôme, secretary-general of the Vigilance
Committee,     a few    weeks    ago expressed     the fear that he could not cover bud-
getary expenditures with foreseen income: ‘‘In that case,”’ Pierre Jérôme states,
‘“we will see our enemies furnished with the best weapon they could hope for.
To be sure, if panic sets in, we ourselves should not faint with fear . . . ”
Jérôme in any case sees a way out of this great difficulty: ‘“In the end, all we
need do is make the rich pay . . . ””
   In fact, nothing is more likely in the near future than a repeat of the disastrous
events that sooner or later followed the electoral victories of the so-called Left
of 1924 and 1932.
                      166 L] POPULAR    FRONT IN THE STREET

    Without being able to have confidence in more or less arbitrary details, one
can foresee, at one time or another, a serious crisis of the entire Left, a crisis
that will not fail to seriously affect the Popular Front itself.
    To tell the truth, those of us who see the Popular Front as a reality in motion
have nothing to become excessively alarmed about in such a crisis. We must
only foresee it, knowing full well that no development of forces and no great
social transformation can take place without a crisis, knowing as well above all
that the forces destined to prevail are those that not only overcome their crises,
but are capable of profiting by them.
    The Popular Front means for us the awareness the people first attained, in
the days of February, of their strength in the face of Fascist thugs and lackeys.
We do not believe that this awareness will allow itself to be shaken on the day
miserable directors betray their own impotence.
    These conditions are, on the contrary, in our opinion, necessary so that the
masses, who have no desire for the reactionary solutions leading to poverty and
war, this time can become aware of the inherent necessities of power. It is pos-
sible that a crisis is indispensable for the transformation—as indicated from the
outset by the menacing attitude of the masses in the street—of the defensive
Popular Front into the Popular Front of combat, and, of course, of combat for
the anticapitalist dictatorship of the people.
   It is clear from now on that, in order to have confidence in its own resources,
the Popular Front must first lose the confidence it currently has in its principal
leaders.

    I do not think it necessary here to insist upon our reasons for having the great-
est distrust and even the greatest contempt for given professional political parlia-
mentarians, who tomorrow risk being entrusted with the position of leadership.
    What interests us above all—the analysis of the economic bases of society
having been accomplished, its results having proven, moreover, to be limited—
are the emotions that give the human masses the surges of power that tear them
away from the domination of those who only know how to lead them on to
poverty and to the slaughterhouse.
    But we would not want to suggest that we blindly abandon ourselves to the
spontaneous reactions of the street.
    We are led to make an essential distinction between the reactions that agitate
men in the street and the phrasemongering of politicians, and all the teachings
of the present period at the very least show that this distinction credits the men
who have nothing going for them but their passions, to the detriment of those
corrupted and often emptied of human content by the strategic task.
    But we find no reason to renounce the decisive intervention of judgment and
of the methodical understanding of the facts. We only wish to apply intelligence
less to so-called political situations and to the logical deductions that ensue, than
to the immediate comprehension of life. Even independently of the tragic events
                       POPULAR   FRONT   IN THE   STREET   O   167


now taking place, we believe that there is more to learn in the streets of great
cities, for example, than in political newspapers or books. For us a significant
reality is the state of prostration and boredom expressed inside a bus by a dozen
human faces, all of them complete strangers. For anyone not already hardened
by the emptiness of life, there is in this world, which seems to have at its dis-
posal limitless resources, a confusion remedied only by a kind of lazily ac-
cepted general imbecility. Even poverty seems at the very least less incurable
than this stupid distress. À beggar whose broken voice cries out a song one can
barely hear in the rear of a courtyard seems at times to have lost less in the
game of life than the human matter arranged in buses and trains during rush
hour.
   Someone   told me    the other day, correctly,   that the source of the Croix   de
Feu’s might was very simple: the Croix de Feu, in general, are people who are
bored. The minimum of contagious passion animating the Croix de Feu, the low
budget exaltation—to tell the truth, an exaltation good for workrooms—
maintained by this pillar of human boredom (family barracks) known as the
Count Colonel de la Rocque, is somehow enough to maintain a vague gleam of
life in empty brains, but no taste for what is burning or colorful in life grips
them, and the sinister job of the Croix de Feu becomes their whole life.
    The opium of the people in the present world 1s perhaps not so much religion
as it is accepted boredom. Such a world is at the mercy, it must be known, of
those who provide at least the semblance of an escape from boredom. Human
life aspires to the passions, and again encounters its exigencies.
    It can appear out of place and even absolutely absurd to those who worry
about which platforms must serve as the basis for future actions, when we
respond by saying that the world in which they bustle about is doomed to
boredom.
    This remark, however, has a very simple meaning: in the Communist
opposition, I have personally known a great number of people for whom the
definition of platforms has had an essential value. Their activity resulted only
in stunning boredom, which they saw precisely as the mark of revolutionary
seriousness.
    We want to say that we oppose these preoccupations.
    We believe that strength will belong not to those for whom action is a demand
for morose and disagreeable work, but to those who, on the contrary,        will de-
liver the world from its exhausting boredom.
    We want to give precise answers to questions that demand precise answers,
but we maintain that what is essential lies elsewhere.
   We must contribute to the masses’ awareness of their own power; we are sure
that strength results less from strategy than from collective exaltation, and exal-
tation can come only from words that touch not the reason but the passions of
the masses.
    We want to hope that soon the masses will know how to gather and find
                      168 } POPULAR    FRONT IN THE STREET

together, in this reunion, the burning heat that attracts men from all sides and
that will become the basis for an implacable popular domination.
    We ask all those who, along with us, mean to pursue an action parallel to the
one we see open before us how they hope to achieve the dictatorship of the work-
ing masses, how, first of all, they hope to realize the transformation of the de-
fensive Popular Front into a Popular Front of combat.
    As for us, we want to pose the question in a precise way. It seems to me per-
sonally that the only way to pose the question is the following: it is not really
a question of knowing first of all what must be done, but what result must be
envisioned. We know that the question of the takeover of power is now being
posed. We know that, in all likelihood, the democratic regime, which struggles
amidst mortal contradictions, cannot be saved.
    The succession is open. We have many reasons to think that the Croix de Feu
provide no response to the necessities resulting from the current situation—
neither in their social content, the tenor of their program, nor in the personality
of their chief. Their effective value seems to us in this respect to be situated far
below that of the Italian Fascists or the German National Socialists.
   The Popular Front in its present form is not, nor does it present itself, as an
organized force within sight of taking power. It must thus be transformed,
according to the plan of the socialist revolutionary Left, into a Popular Front
of combat.
    As for us, we say that this presupposes a renewal of political forms, a renewal
possible in the present circumstances, when it seems that all revolutionary forces
are called upon to fuse in an incandescent crucible. We are assured that insurrec-
tion 1s impossible for our adversaries. We believe that of the two hostile forces
that will engage in the struggle for power, the fascists and the people, the force
that gets the upper hand will be the one that shows itself most capable of domi-
nating events and imposing an implacable power on its adversaries. What we
demand is a coherent, disciplined organization, its entire will straining with
enthusiasm toward popular power; this is the sense of responsibility that must
devolve on those who tomorrow must be the masters, who must subordinate the
system of production to human interests, who must impose silence, in their own
country and at the same time throughout the world, on the nationalists’ criminal
and puerile passions.

   After February 16.
   500,000 workers, defied by little cockroaches, invaded the streets and caused
an immense uproar.
   Comrades, who has the right to lay down the law?
   This ALL-POWERFUL multitude, thus HUMAN OCEAN . .
   Only this ocean of men in revolt can save the world from the nightmare of
impotence and carnage in which it sinks!
II
(1936 —1939)
The Labyrinth




       Negativity, in other words, the integrity of determination.
                                                                            Hegel


                              I. The Insufficiency of Beings
MEN ACT IN ORDER TO BE. This must not be understood in the negative
sense of conservation (conserving in order not to be thrown out of existence by
death), but in the positive sense of a tragic and incessant combat for a satisfac-
tion that is almost beyond reach. From incoherent agitation to crushing sleep,
from   chatter   to turning    inward,   from    overwhelming   love to hardening   hate,
existence sometimes weakens and sometimes accomplishes ‘‘being.”’ And not
only do states have a variable intensity, but different beings ‘‘are’’ unequally.
A dog that runs and barks seems ‘‘to be’’ more than a mute and clinging sponge,
the sponge more than the water in which it lives, an influential man more than
a vacant passerby.
    In the first movement, where the force that the master has at his disposal puts
the slave at his mercy, the master deprives the slave of a part of his being. Much
later, in return, the ‘‘existence’’ of the master is impoverished to the extent that
it distances itself from the material elements of life. The slave enriches his being
to the extent that he enslaves these elements by the work to which his impotence
condemns him.
    The contradictory movements of degradation and growth attain, in the diffuse
development of human existence, a bewildering complexity. The fundamental

                                                171
                               172 O   THE   LABYRINTH


separation of men into masters and slaves is only the crossed threshold, the entry
into the world of specialized functions where personal ‘‘existence’’ empties
itself of its contents; a man is no longer anything but a part of being, and his
life, engaged in the game of creation and destruction that goes beyond it, appears
as a degraded particle lacking reality. The very fact of assuming that knowledge
is a function throws the philosopher back into the world of petty inconsistencies
and dissections of lifeless organs. Isolated as much from action as from the
dreams that turn action away and echo it in the strange depths of animated life,
he led astray the very being that he chose as the object of his uneasy comprehen-
sion. ‘‘Being’’ increases in the tumultuous agitation of a life that knows no limits;
it wastes away and disappears if he who is at the same time ‘‘being’’ and knowl-
edge mutilates himself by reducing himself to knowledge.
    This deficiency can grow even greater if the object of knowledge is no longer
being in general but a narrow domain, such as an organ, a mathematical ques-
tion, a juridical form. Action and dreams do not escape this poverty (each time
they are confused with the totality of being), and, in the multicolored immensity
of human lives, a limitless insufficiency is revealed; life, finding its endpoint in
the happiness of a bugle blower or the snickering of a village chair-renter, is
no longer the fulfillment of itself, but is its own ludicrous degradation—its fall
is comparable to that of a king onto the floor.

   At the basis of human life there exists a principle of insufficiency. In isolation,
each man sees the majority of others as incapable or unworthy of ‘‘being.’’
There is found, in all free and slanderous conversation, as an animating theme,
the awareness of the vanity and the emptiness of our fellowmen; an apparently
stagnant conversation betrays the blind and impotent flight of all life toward an
indefinable summit.
    The sufficiency of each being is endlessly contested by every other. Even the
look that expresses love and admiration comes to me as a doubt concerning my
reality. A burst of laughter or the expression of repugnance greets each gesture,
cach sentence or each oversight through which my profound insufficiency is
betrayed—just as sobs would be the response to my sudden death, to a total and
irremediable omission.
   This uneasiness on the part of everyone grows and reverberates, since at each
detour, with a kind of nausea, men discover their solitude in empty night. The
universal night in which everything finds itself—and soon loses itself—would
appear to be existence for nothing, without influence, equivalent to the absence
of being, were it not for human nature that emerges within it to give a dramatic
importance to being and life. But this absurd night manages to empty itself of
‘“being’’ and meaning each time a man discovers within it human destiny, itself
locked in turn in a comic impasse, like a hideous and discordant trumpet blast.
That which, in me, demands that there be ‘‘being’’ in the world, ‘‘being’’ and
                              THE   LABYRINTH   G   173


not just the manifest insufficiency of human or nonhuman nature, necessarily
projects (at one time or another and in reply to human chatter) divine sufficiency
across space, like the reflection of an impotence, of a servilely accepted malady
of being.


       II. The Composite Character of Beings and the Impossibility
                  of Fixing Existence in Any Given Ipse
Being in the world is so uncertain that I can project it where I want—outside
of me. It is a clumsy man, still incapable of eluding the intrigues of nature, who
locks being in the me. Being in fact is found NOWHERE and it was an easy
game for a sickly malice to discover it to be divine, at the summit of a pyramid
formed by the multitude of beings, which has at its base the immensity of the
simplest matter.
     Being could be confined to the electron if ipseity were precisely not lacking
in this simple element. The atom itself has a complexity that is too elementary
to be determined ipsely.! The number of particles that make up a being intervene
in a sufficiently heavy and clear way in the constitution of its ipseity; if a knife
has its handle and blade indefinitely replaced, it loses even the shadow of ipseity;
it is not the same for a machine which, after five or six years, loses each of the
numerous elements that constituted it when new. But the ipseity that is finally
apprehended with difficulty in the machine is still only shadowlike.
     Starting from an extreme complexity, being imposes on reflection more than
the precariousness of a fugitive appearance, but this complexity—displaced little
by little—becomes in turn the labyrinth where what had suddenly come forward
strangely loses its way.
     À sponge is reduced by pounding to a dust of cells; this living dust is formed
by a multitude of isolated beings, and is lost in the new sponge that it reconsti-
tutes. A siphonophore fragment is by itself an autonomous being, yet the whole
siphonophore, to which this fragment belongs, is itself hardly different from a
being possessing unity. Only with linear animals (worms, insects, fish, reptiles,
birds, and mammals) do the living individual forms definitively lose the faculty
of constituting aggregates bound together in a single body. But while societies
of nonlinear animals do not exist, superior animals form aggregates without ever
giving rise to corporeal links; men as well as beavers or ants form societies of
individuals whose bodies are autonomous. But in regard to being, is this auton-
omy the final appearance, or is it simply error?
   In men, all existence is tied in particular to language, whose terms determine
its modes of appearance within each person. Each person can only represent his
total existence, if only in his own eyes, through the medium of words. Words
spring forth in his head, laden with a host of human or superhuman lives in
relation to which he privately exists. Being depends on the mediation of words,
                                  174 [ THE LABYRINTH

which cannot merely present it arbitrarily as ‘‘autonomous being,’’ but which
must present it profoundly as ‘‘being in relation.”” One need only follow, for
a short time, the traces of the repeated circuits of words to discover, in a discon-
certing vision, the labyrinthine structure of the human being. What is commonly
called knowing—when a man knows his neighbor—is never anything but exis-
tence composed for an instant (in the sense that all existence composes itself—
thus the atom composes its unity from variable electrons), which once made of
these two beings a whole every bit as real as its parts. A limited number of
exchanged phrases, no matter how conventional, sufficed to create the banal
interpenetration of two existing juxtaposed regions. The fact that after this short
exchange the man is aware of knowing his neighbor is opposed to a meeting
without recognition in the street, as well as to the ignorance of the multitude of
beings that one never meets, in the same way that life is opposed to death. The
knowledge of human beings thus appears as a mode of biological connection,
unstable but just as real as the connections between cells in tissue. The exchange
between two human particles in fact possesses the faculty of surviving momen-
tary separation.
    A man is only a particle inserted in unstable and entangled wholes. These
wholes are composed in personal life in the form of multiple possibilities, start-
ing with a knowledge that is crossed like a threshold—and the existence of the
particle can in no way be isolated from this composition, which agitates it in the
midst of a whirlwind of ephemerids. This extreme instability of connections
alone permits one to introduce, as a puerile but convenient illusion, a representa-
tion of isolated existence turning in on itself.

    In the most general way, every isolable element of the universe always
appears as a particle that can enter into composition with a whole that tran-
scends it. Being is only found as a whole composed of particles whose relative
autonomy is maintained. These two principles dominate the uncertain presence
of an ipse being across a distance that never ceases to put everything in question.
Emerging in universal play as unforeseeable chance, with extreme dread im-
peratively becoming the demand for universality, carried away to vertigo by the
movement that composes it, the ipse being that presents itself as a universal is
only a challenge to the diffuse immensity that escapes its precarious violence,
the tragic negation of all that is not its own bewildered phantom’s chance. But,
as a man, this being falls into the meanders of the knowledge of his fellowmen,
which absorbs his substance in order to reduce it to a component of what goes
beyond the virulent madness of his autonomy in the total night of the world.
    Abdication and inevitable fatigue—due to the fact that ‘“being’’ is, par excel-
lence,   that which,   desired   to the point of dread,   cannot   be endured—plunge
human beings into a foggy labyrinth formed by the multitude of ‘‘acquain-
tances’’ with which signs of life and phrases can be exchanged. But when he
                               THE   LABYRINTH   O   175


escapes the dread of ‘‘being’’ through this flight—a ‘‘being’’ that is autonomous
and isolated in night—a man is thrown back into insufficiency, at least if he can-
not find outside of himself the blinding flash that he had been unable to endure
within himself, without whose intensity his life is but an impoverishment, of
which he feels obscurely ashamed.


                      III. The Structure of the Labyrinth
Emerging out of an inconceivable void into the play of beings, as a lost satellite
of two phantoms (one with a bristly beard, the other softer, her head decorated
with a bun), it is in the father and mother who transcend him that the minuscule
human being first encountered the illusion of sufficiency. In the complexity and
entanglement of wholes, to which the human particle belongs, this satellite-like
mode of existence never entirely disappears. A particular being not only acts as
an element of a shapeless and structureless whole (a part of the world of unim-
portant ‘‘acquaintances’’ and chatter), but also as a peripheral element orbiting
around a nucleus where being hardens. What the lost child had found in the self-
assured existence of the all-powerful beings who took care of him is now sought
by the abandoned man wherever knots and concentrations are formed throughout
a vast incoherence. Each particular being delegates to the group of those situated
at the center of the multitudes the task of realizing the inherent totality of
‘“being.’’ He is content to be a part of a total existence, which even in the
simplest cases retains a diffuse character. Thus relatively stable wholes are pro-
duced, whose center 1s a city, in its early form a corolla that encloses a double
pistil of sovereign and god. In the case where many cities abdicate their central
function in favor of a single city, an empire forms around a capital where sover-
eignty and the gods are concentrated; the gravitation around a center then de-
grades the existence of peripheral cities, where the organs that constituted the
totality of being wilt. By degrees, a more and more complex movement of group
composition raises to the point of universality the human race, but it seems that
universality, at the summit, causes all existence to explode and decomposes it
with violence. The universal god destroys rather than supports the human aggre-
gates that raise his ghost. He himself is only dead, whether a mythical delirium
set him up to be adored as a cadaver covered with wounds, or whether through
his very universality he becomes, more than any other, incapable of stopping
the loss of being with the cracked partitions of ipseity.


                      IV. The Modalities of Composition
                          and Decomposition of Being

The city that little by little empties itself of life, in favor of a more brilliant and
attractive city, is the expressive image of the play of existence engaged in com-
                               176 U THE LABYRINTH

position. Because of the composing attraction, composition empties elements of
the greatest part of their being, and this benefits the center—in other words, it
benefits composite being. There is the added fact that, in a given domain, if the
attraction of a certain center is stronger than that of a neighboring center, the
second center then goes into decline. The action of powerful poles of attraction
across the human world thus reduces, depending on their force of resistance, a
multitude of personal beings to the state of empty shadows, especially when the
pole of attraction on which they depend itself declines, due to the action of
another more powerful pole. Thus if one imagines the effects of an influential
current of attraction on a more or less arbitrarily isolated form of activity, a style
of clothing created in a certain city devalues the clothes worn up to that time
and, consequently, it devalues those who wear them within the limits of the
influence of this city. This devaluation is stronger if, in a neighboring country,
the fashions of a more brilliant city have already outclassed those of the first
city. The objective character of these relations is registered in reality when the
contempt and laughter manifested in a given center are not compensated for by
anything elsewhere, and when they exert an effective fascination. The effort
made on the periphery to ‘‘keep up with fashion’’ demonstrates the inability of
the peripheral particles to exist by themselves.
    Laughter intervenes in these value determinations of being as the expression
of the circuit of movements of attraction across a human field. It manifests itself
each time a change in level suddenly occurs: it characterizes all vacant lives as
ridiculous. A kind of incandescent joy—the explosive and sudden revelation of
the presence of being—is liberated each time a striking appearance is contrasted
with its absence, with the human void. Laughter casts a glance, charged with
the mortal violence of being, into the void of life.
    But laughter is not only the composition of those it assembles into a unique
convulsion; it most often decomposes without consequence, and sometimes with
a virulence that is so pernicious that it even puts in question composition itself,
and the wholes across which it functions. Laughter attains not only the periph-
eral regions of existence, and its object is not only the existence of fools and
children (of those who remain vacant); through a necessary reversal, it is sent
back from the child to its father and from the periphery to the center, each time
the father or the center in turn reveals an insufficiency comparable to that of the
particles that orbit around it. Such a central insufficiency can be ritually revealed
(in saturnalia or in a festival of the ass as well as in the puerile grimaces of the
father amusing his child). It can be revealed by the very action of children or
the ‘‘poor’’ each time exhaustion withers and weakens authority, allowing its
precarious character to be seen. In both cases, a dominant necessity manifests
itself, and the profound nature of being is disclosed. Being can complete itself
and attain the menacing gradeur of imperative totality; this accomplishment only
serves to project it with a greater violence into the vacant night. The relative
                                THE   LABYRINTH     O   177


insufficiency of peripheral existences is absolute insufficiency in total existence.
Above knowable existences, laughter traverses the human pyramid like a net-
work of endless waves that renew themselves in all directions. This reverberated
convulsion chokes, from one end to the other, the innumerable being of man—
opened at the summit by the agony of God in a black night.


                V. The Monster in the Night of the Labyrinth
Being attains the blinding flash in tragic annihilation. Laughter only assumes its
fullest impact on being at the moment when, in the fall that it unleashes, a
representation of death is cynically recognized. It is not only the composition
of elements that constitutes the incandescence of being, but its decomposition in
its mortal form. The difference in levels that provokes common laughter—which
opposes the lack of an absurd life to the plenitude of successful being—can be
replaced by that which opposes the summit of imperative elevation to the dark
abyss that obliterates all existence. Laughter is thus assumed by the totality of
being. Renouncing the avaricious malice of the scapegoat, being itself, to the
extent that it is the sum of existences at the limits of the night, is spasmodically
shaken by the idea of the ground giving way beneath its feet. It is in universality
(where, due to solitude, the possibility of facing death through war disappears)
that the necessity of engaging in a struggle, no longer with an equal group but
with nothingness, becomes clear. THE UNIVERSAL resembles a bull, some-
times absorbed in the nonchalance of animality and abandoned to the secret pale-
ness of death, and sometimes hurled by the rage of ruin into the void ceaselessly
opened before it by a skeletal torero. But the void it meets is also the nudity it
espouses TO THE EXTENT THAT IT IS A MONSTER lightly assuming many
crimes, and it is no longer, like the bull, the plaything of nothingness, because
nothingness itself is its plaything; it only throws itself into nothingness in order
to tear it apart and to illuminate the night for an instant, with an immense
laugh—a laugh it never would have attained if this nothingness had not totally
opened beneath its feet.

                                            Note

    1. See Paul Langevin, La Notion de corpuscules et d’atomes (Paris: Hermann,   1934), p. 35.
The Sacred Conspiracy
                                        |




       An already old and corrupt nation, courageously shaking off the
       yoke of its monarchical government in order to adopt a
       republican one, can only maintain itself through many crimes;
       for it is already in crime, and if it wants to move from crime to
       virtue, in other words from a violent state to a peaceful one, it
       would fall into an inertia, of which its certain ruin would soon
       be the result.
                                                                         Sade


       What looks like politics, and imagines itself to be political, will
       one day unmask itself as a religious movement.
                                                                 Kierkegaard


       Today solitary, you who live apart, you one day will be a
       people.   Those who have designated themselves will one day be a
       designated people, and from this people will be born the life that
       goes beyond man.
                                                                    Nietzsche

    What we have started must not be confused with anything else, cannot be
limited to the expression of a thought, and still less to what is rightly considered
art.
                                            178
                           THE SACRED    CONSPIRACY       [J    179


   It is necessary to produce and to eat: many things are necessary that are still
nothing, and so it is with political agitation.

    Who dreams, before having struggled to the end, of relinquishing his place
to men it is impossible to look at without feeling the need to destroy? If nothing
can be found beyond political activity, human avidity will meet nothing but a
void.

   WE ARE FEROCIOUSLY             RELIGIOUS     and, to the extent that our existence
is the condemnation of everything that is recognized today, an inner exigency
demands that we be equally imperious.

   What we are starting is a war.

    It is time to abandon the world of the civilized and its light. It is too late to
be reasonable and educated—which has led to a life without appeal. Secretly or
not, it is necessary to become completely different, or to cease being.
    The world to which we have belonged offers nothing to love outside of each
individual insufficiency: its existence is limited to utility. À world that cannot
be loved to the point of death—in the same way that a man loves a woman—
represents only self-interest and the obligation to work. If it is compared to
worlds gone by, it is hideous, and appears as the most failed of all. In past
worlds,   it was   possible to lose oneself in ecstasy,        which   is impossible   in our
world of educated vulgarity. The advantages of civilization are offset by the way
men profit from them: men today profit in order to become the most degraded
beings that have ever existed.
    Life has always taken place in a tumult without apparent cohesion, but it only
finds its grandeur and its reality in ecstasy and in ecstatic love. He who tries to
ignore or misunderstand ecstasy is an incomplete being whose thought is re-
duced to analysis. Existence is not only an agitated void, it is a dance that forces
one to dance with fanaticism. Thought that does not have a dead fragment as its
object has the inner existence of flames.
    It is necessary to become sufficiently firm and unshaken so that the existence
of the world of civilization finally appears uncertain.
    It is useless to respond to those who are able to believe in the existence of
this world and who take their authority from it; if they speak, it is possible to
look at them without hearing them and, even when one looks at them, to ‘‘see’’
only what exists far behind them. It is necessary to refuse boredom and live only
for fascination.
    On this path, it is vain to become restless and seek to attract those who have
idle whims, such as passing the time, laughing, or becoming individually bi-
zarre. It is necessary to go forward without looking back and without taking into
account those who do not have the strength to forget immediate reality.
                         180 LU THE SACRED CONSPIRACY




         Figure 12. André Masson, Acéphale. © by ADAGP, Paris, 1985.


    Human life is exhausted from serving as the head of, or the reason for, the
universe. To the extent that it becomes this head and this reason, to the extent
that it becomes necessary to the universe, it accepts servitude. If it is not free,
existence becomes empty or neutral and, if it is free, it is in play. The Earth,
as long as it only gave rise to cataclysms, trees, and birds, was a free universe;
the fascination of freedom was tarnished when the Earth produced a being who
demanded necessity as a law above the universe. Man however has remained
free not to respond to any necessity; he is free to resemble everything that is
not himself in the universe. He can set aside the thought that it is he or God who
keeps the rest of things from being absurd.
                         THE SACRED CONSPIRACY       U   181

    Man has escaped from his head just as the condemned man has escaped from
his prison. He has found beyond himself not God, who is the prohibition against
crime, but a being who is unaware of prohibition. Beyond what I am, I meet
a being who makes me laugh because he is headless; this fills me with dread
because he is made of innocence and crime; he holds a steel weapon in his left
hand, flames like those of a Sacred Heart in his right. He reunites in the same
eruption Birth and Death. He is not a man. He is not a god either. He is not
me but he is more than me: his stomach is the labyrinth in which he has lost
himself, loses me with him, and in which I discover myself as him, in other
words as a monster.

    What I have thought or represented, I have not thought or represented alone.
l am writing in a little cold house in a village of fishermen; a dog has just barked
in the night. My room is next to the kitchen where André Masson is happily
moving around and singing; at this very moment, as I write, he has just put on
the phonograph a recording of the overture to Don Giovanni; more than anything
else, the overture to Don Giovanni ties my lot in life to a challenge that opens
me to a rapturous escape from the self. At this very moment, I am watching this
acephalic being, this intruder composed of two equally excited obsessions, be-
come the ‘‘Tomb of Don Giovanni.’’ When,        a few days ago, I was with André
Masson in this kitchen, seated, a glass of wine in my hand, he suddenly talked
of his own death and the death of his family, his eyes fixed, suffering, almost
screaming that it was necessary for it to become a tender and passionate death,
screaming his hatred for a world that weighs down even on death with its em-
ployee’s paw—and I was no longer able to doubt that the lot and the infinite
tumult of human life were open to those who could no longer exist as empty eye
sockets, but as seers swept away by an overwhelming dream they could not own.

                                                           Tossa, April 29, 1936
Nietzsche                 and the Fascists




                                   Elisabeth Judas-Forster

The Jew Judas betrayed Jesus for a small sum of money—after that he hanged
himself. The betrayal carried out by those close to Nietzsche does not have the
brutal consequences of Judas’s, but it sums up and makes intolerable all the be-
trayals that deform the teachings of Nietzsche (betrayals that put him on the level
of the most shortsighted of current enthusiasms). The anti-Semitic falsifications
of Frau Forster, Nietzsche’s sister, and of Herr Richard Oehler, his cousin, are
in some ways even more vulgar than Judas’s deal—beyond all reckoning, they
give the force of a whiplash to the maxim in which Nietzsche expressed his
horror of anti-Semitism:

   DO NOT BEFRIEND                 ANYONE     INVOLVED       IN THIS IMPUDENT
   HOAX, RACISM!"

   The name of Elisabeth Fôrster-Nietzsche,” who died on November 8, 1935,
after living a life devoted to a very narrow and degrading form of family-wor-
ship, has not yet become an object of aversion . . . On November 2, 1933
Elisabeth Fôrster-Nietzsche had not forgotten the difficulties that came up
between    her and     her brother    over   her marriage,   in   1885,   to the anti-Semite
Bernhard Forster. A letter in which Nietzsche reminds her of his ‘‘repulsion’’—
‘“as pronounced as possible’’ for her husband’s party—which he specifically
mentions with bitterness—was published through her own efforts.” On No-
vember    2,   1933,   receiving    Adolf Hitler at Weimar,       in the Nietzsche-Archiv,

                                               182
                             NIETZSEHE AND THE FASCISTS             [J 183

Elisabeth Forster testified to Nietzsche’s anti-Semitism by reading a text by
Bernhard Forster.

      Before leaving Weimar to go to Essen [reports the Times of
   November       4,   1933],        Chancellor    Hitler went to visit Frau   Elisabeth
  Forster-Nietzsche, the sister of the famous philosopher. The aged lady
  gave him a sword cane that had belonged to her brother. She led him
  on a tour of the Nietzsche archives.
      Herr Hitler listened to a reading of a statement, addressed to
  Bismarck, written in 1879 by Dr. Forster, an anti-Semitic agitator,
  which protests against the ‘‘Jewish spirit’s invasion of Germany.”’
  Holding Nietzsche’s cane, Herr Hitler walked through the cheering
  crowd and got back into his car in order to go to Erfurt, and from
  there to Essen.

   Nietzsche,     writing       in     1887   a scorning   letter to the anti-Semite       Theodor
Fritsch,* ends     it with these words:

   BUT FINALLY, WHAT DO YOU THINK I FEEL WHEN
   ZARATHUSTRA’S NAME COMES OUT OF THE MOUTH                                            OF AN
   ANTI-SEMITE!


                       The   Second Judas           of the Nietzsche-Archiv

Adolf Hitler, in Weimar, had himself photographed before a bust of Nietzsche.
Herr Richard Oehler, Nietzsche’s cousin and a collaborator of Elisabeth Forster
at the archives, had the photograph reproduced as the frontispiece of his book
Nietzsche and the Future of Germany.® In this work, he tried to show the pro-
found kinship of Nietzsche’s teachings and those of Mein Kampf. He recognizes,
it is true, the existence of passages in Nietzsche that are not hostile to the Jews,
but he concludes:
       Most important for us is this warning:
       ‘“Admit no more Jews! And especially close the doors to the
   east!”” . . . ““That Germany has amply enough Jews, that the German
   stomach, the German blood has trouble (and will still have trouble for
   a long time) digesting even this quantum of ‘Jew’—as the Italians,
   French, and English have done, having a stronger digestive system—
   that is the clear testimony and language of a general instinct to which
  one must       listen, in accordance            with which   one must act.   ‘Admit    no
   more Jews! And especially close the doors to the east (also to Aus-
   tria!’ thus commands the instinct of a people whose type 1s still weak
   and indefinite, so it could easily be blurred or extinguished by a
   stronger race.”’

   It is not only a case here of an ‘‘impudent hoax,’’ but of a crudely and con-
                       184 [] NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS

sciously fabricated falsehood. This text appears, in fact, in Beyond Good and
Evil (section 251), but the opinion it expresses is not that of Nietzsche, but that
of the anti-Semites, taken up by Nietzsche in order to mock it.
      I have not met a German yet who was well disposed toward the
   Jews; and however unconditionally all the cautious and politically
   minded repudiated real anti-Semitism, even this caution and policy are
   not directed against the species of this feeling itself but only against its
   dangerous immoderation, especially against the inspired and shameful
   expression of this immoderate feeling—about this, one should not
   deceive oneself. That Germany has amply enough Jews, etc.

     After this comes the passage attributed by the fascist forger to Nietzsche! A
little further on a practical conclusion is, moreover, given to these
considerations: ‘‘it might be useful and fair to expel the anti-Semite screamers
from the country.’’ This time Nietzsche speaks in his own name. The aphorism
as a whole favors the assimilation of the Jews by the Germans.

                             Do Not Kill:
                             Reduce to Slavery

   DOES MY LIFE MAKE IT LIKELY THAT I COULD                     ALLOW
   ANYONE AT ALL TO *“CLIP MY WINGS’’?°

    The tone Nietzsche used during his lifetime to answer obnoxious anti-Semites
excludes the possibility of treating the question lightly, and of considering the
Weimar Judases’ treason to be venial: he appears there with ‘‘clipped wings.”’
    Nietzsche’s relatives have attempted nothing less base than the reduction to
degrading slavery of the one who intended to disprove servile morality. Is it pos-
sible that there is no gnashing of teeth in the world, and doesn’t this absence
become so obvious that, in the ever-growing confusion, it makes one silent and
violent? How, when one is in a rage, could this not be blindingly clear: when
all of humanity is rushing toward slavery, there exists something that must not
be enslaved, that cannot be enslaved?
    NIETZSCHE’S DOCTRINE CANNOT BE ENSLAVED.
    It can only be followed. To place it behind or in the service of anything else
is a betrayal deserving the kind of contempt that wolves have for dogs.
    DOES NIETZSCHE’S LIFE MAKE IT SEEM LIKELY THAT HE CAN
HAVE HIS ‘‘WINGS CLIPPED’’ BY ANYONE AT ALL?
    Whether it be anti-Semitism, fascism—or socialism—there is only use.
Nictzsche addressed free spirits, incapable of letting themselves be used.


                       The Nietzschean Left and Right
The very movement of Nietzsche’s thought implies a destruction of the different
possible foundations of current political positions. Groups of the right basc their
                      NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS           O   185

action on an emotional attachment to the past. Groups of the left on rational prin-
ciples. Now attachment to the past and to rational principles (justice, social
equality) are both rejected by Nietzsche. Thus it would have to be impossible
to use his teachings in any given orientation.
     But his teachings represent an incomparable seductive force, and conse-
quently quite simple a ‘‘force,’’ that politicians are tempted to enslave, or at the
very least to agree with, in order to benefit their enterprises. The teachings of
Nietzsche ‘‘mobilize’’ the will and the aggressive instincts; it was inevitable that
existing activities would try to draw into their movement these now mobile and
still unemployed wills and instincts.
     The absence of all possible adaptation to one or the other of these political
orientations has had, under these conditions, only one result. Since Nietzschean
exaltation can be solicited only because of a misunderstanding of its nature, it
has been solicited in both directions at once. To a certain extent, a Nietzschean
left and right have appeared, just as, in the past, a Hegelian left and right
appeared.’ But Hegel located himself in the political sphere, and his dialectical
conceptions explain the formation of the two opposed tendencies of his doctrine
that developed after his death. It is a question in one case of logical and well-
thought-out developments, in the other of irrationality, of frivolity, or of be-
trayal. On the whole, the demands put forward by Nietzsche, far from being
understood, have been treated like everything else in a world in which a servile
attitude and use value alone appear admissible. On a global scale, the transvalu-
ation of values, even if it has been the object of real attempts at understanding,
has remained so generally unintelligible that the treasonous and platitudinous
interpretations of which it has been the object very nearly pass unnoticed.


                              ‘‘Remarks      for Asses”’

Nietzsche himself said that he felt only repugnance for the political parties of
his day, but ambiguity remains on the subject of fascism, which only developed
long after his death and which, in addition, is the only political movement that
has consciously and systematically used Nietzschean criticism. According to the
Hungarian Georg Lukdcs (one of the few, it seems, among current Marxist
theorists to have a profound awareness of the essence of Marxism—but ever
since he has had to take refuge in Moscow        he has been morally           broken;   he is
now nothing more than a shadow of his former self)—according to Lukécs ‘‘the
very clear difference between the ideological level of Nietzsche and that of his
fascist successors cannot hide the fundamental historical fact that makes
Nietzsche one of the principle ancestors of fascism’’ (Littérature Internationale
9, 1935, p. 79). The analysis on which Lukdcs bases this conclusion is some-
times perhaps refined and clever, but it 1s only an analysis that dispenses with
a consideration   of the whole,   in other   words,   of what        alone   is ‘‘existence.’’
Fascism   and Nietzscheanism      are mutually    exclusive,    and are even violently
                         186 [1 NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS

mutually exclusive, as soon as each of them is considered in its totality: on one
side life 1s tied down   and stabilized in an endless servitude, on the other there
is not only a circulation of free air, but the wind of a tempest; on one side the
charm of human culture is broken in order to make room for vulgar force, on
the other force and violence are tragically dedicated to this charm. How can one
not see the abyss that separates a Cesare Borgia, a Malatesta, from a Mussolini?
The former were insolent scorners of tradition and of all morality, making use
of bloody and complex events to benefit a greed for life that exceeded them; the
latter has been slowly enslaved by everything he was able to set in motion only
by paralyzing, little by little, his earliest impulses. Already, in Nietzsche’s eyes,
Napoleon appeared ‘‘corrupted by the means he had to employ’’; Napoleon
““lost noblesse of character.”’® An infinitely more burdensome constraint no
doubt weighs on modern dictators, reduced to finding their force by identifying
themselves with all the impulses that Nietzsche scorned in the masses, in partic-
ular, ‘‘mendacious racial self-admiration and racial indecency.’’® There is a
corrosive derision in imagining a possible agreement between Nietzschean
demands and a political organization which impoverishes existence at its
summit, which imprisons, exiles, or kills everything that could constitute an
aristocracy'° of ‘‘free spirits.”’ As if it were not blindingly obvious that when
Nietzsche demands a love corresponding to the sacrifice of life, it is for the
““faith’’ that he communicates,     for the values that his own existence makes real,
and obviously not for a fatherland . . .
   ‘‘Remarks for asses’’ wrote Nietzsche himself, already fearing a confusion
of the same type, and one just as wretched."!


                            The     Nietzschean   Mussolini

Insofar as fascism values a philosophical source, it is attached to Hegel and not
to Nietzsche.'” One should read the article, in the Enciclopedia Italiana, that
Mussolini himself devoted to the movement           he created;'* the vocabulary,        and
even more than the vocabulary the spirit, are Hegelian and not Nietzschean.
Mussolini twice is able to use the expression ‘‘will to power,’’ but it is no coin-
cidence that this will is only an attribute of the idea that unifies the
crowd . . . "
   The red agitator underwent the influence of Nietzsche; the unitarist dictator
has remained aloof. The regime itself has spoken on the question. In an article
in Fascismo, July 1933, Cimmino denies any ideological filiation linking
Nietzsche and Mussolini. Only the will to power would connect their doctrines.
But   Mussolini’s   will to power    ‘‘is not selfish’’;   it is preached   to all Italians,
whom // Duce ‘‘wants to make supermen.’’ For, affirms the author, ‘‘even if
we were all supermen, we would still only be men. . . . There 1s nothing more
natural than the fact that, in other respects, Nietzsche pleases Mussolini:
                       NIETZSCHE      AND    THE   FASCISTS   [J   187


Nietzsche will always belong to all men of action and will . . . The profound
difference between Nietzsche and Mussolini lies in the fact that power, insofar
as it is will, force, and action, 1s the product of instinct—I would say almost of
physical nature. It can belong to the most incompatible people: one can use it
for the most varied ends. On the other hand, ideology is a spiritual factor: it is
ideology that really unites men. . . . "’ It is not useful to insist on the overt
idealism of this text, which has the merit of being honest, if one compares it to
the German writings. It is more remarkable to see Il Duce cleared of a possible
accusation of Nietzschean selfishness. The ruling circles of Fascism seem to
have stopped at the Stirnerian interpretation of Nietzsche, expressed around
1908 by Mussolini himself.'*
   For Stirner,   for Nietzsche   [the revolutionary      wrote at the time], and
   for all those whom Turk, in his Geniale Mensch, calls the antisophs of
   selfishness, the State is oppression organized to the detriment of the
   individual. But nevertheless, even for animals of prey there exists a
   principle of solidarity. . . . The instinct of sociability, according to
   Darwin,   is inherent   in man’s   very   nature.   It is impossible to imagine a
   human being living outside the infinite chain of his fellow men.
   Nietzsche felt profoundly the ‘‘fatality’’ of this law of universal soli-
   darity. The Nietzschean superman tries to escape the contradiction: he
   lets loose his will to power and directs it against the mob outside, and
   the tragic grandeur of his labors furnishes the poet—for yet a little
   while—with a subject worthy of being sung.

   One can see, then, why Mussolini, stressing the non-Italian influences that
helped form early Fascism, speaks of Sorel, Péguy, and Lagardelle, and not of
Nietzsche. Official Fascism has been able to use invigorating Nietzschean
maxims, displaying them on walls; its brutal simplifications must nevertheless
be sheltered from the too-free, too-complex, and too-rending Nietzschean
world. This prudence seems to be based, it is true, on an outmoded interpreta-
tion of Nietzsche’s attitude, but this interpretation has been carried out, and it
has been because the movement of Nietzsche’s thought constitutes, without any
hope of appeal, a labyrinth, in other words, the very opposite of the directives
that current political systems demand from their sources of inspiration.


                                  Alfred Rosenberg
Nevertheless the Hitlerian affirmation is opposed to the prudence of Italian
Fascism. It is true that Nietzsche, in the racist pantheon, does not occupy an
official place. Chamberlain, Paul de Lagarde, or Wagner are more solidly satis-
fying to the profound ‘‘admiration of oneself’’ practiced by the Germany of the
Third Reich. But whatever the dangers of this operation, this new Germany had
to recognize Nietzsche and use him. He represented too many mobile instincts,
                       188 [   NIETZSCHE   AND    THE   FASCISTS


available for virtually any violent action—and the falsification was still too easy.
The first fully developed ideology of National Socialism, as it has sprung out
of Alfred Rosenberg’s brain, accommodates Nietzsche.
     Before anything else, the German chauvinists had to get rid of the individual-
istic Stirnerian interpretation. Alfred Rosenberg, making short work of left-
wing Nietzscheanism, seems, with rage, bent on tearing Nietzsche out of the
clutches of the young Mussolini and his comrades:

   Friedrich Nietzsche [he says in his Myth of the Twentieth Century]'®
   represents the desperate cry of millions of oppressed people. his sav-
   age prediction of the superman was a powerful amplification of indi-
   vidual life, subjugated and annihilated by the material pressure of the
   epoch. . . . But an epoch gagged for generations grasps, through its
   impotence, only the subjective side of Nietzsche’s great will and vital
   experience. Nietzsche demanded, with passion, a strong personality;
   his falsified demand   becomes   an appeal,     a letting loose of all the in-
   stincts. Around his banner rally the red battalions and the nomadic
   prophets of Marxism, the sort of men whose senseless doctrine has
   never been more    ironically denounced       than by Nietzsche.   In his name,
   the contamination of the race by blacks and Syrians progressed,
   whereas he himself strictly submitted to the characteristic discipline of
   our race. Nietzsche fell into the dreams of colored gigolos, which is
   worse than falling into the hands of a gang of thieves. From this point
   on the German people only heard talk of the suppression of con-
   straints, of subjectivism, of ‘‘personality,’’ but it was no longer a
   question of discipline and of inner construction. Nietzsche’s most
   beautiful expression—‘‘From the future come winds with the strange
   beating of wings, and the good news resounds in his ears’’—was noth-
   ing more than a nostalgic intuition in the midst of an insane world in
   which he was, along with Lagarde and Wagner, almost the only seer.

    ‘“If you knew how I laughed last spring while reading the works of this vain
and sentimental, pigheaded character named Paul de Lagarde”’—that is what
Nietzsche said about the famous Pan-Germanist.'” Nietzsche’s laugh could
obviously be carried over from Lagarde to Rosenberg, the laughter of a man
equally nauseated by the Social Democrats and by the racists. The attitude of
a Rosenberg must not, moreover, be simply seen as a vulgar Nietzscheanism (as
is sometimes supposed, for example, by Edmond Vermeil). The disciple is not
only vulgar, but prudent: the very fact that a Rosenberg speaks of Nietzsche
suffices to ‘‘clip his wings’’ but it seems to a man of this type that the wings
arc never clipped back far enough. According to Rosenberg, everything that is
not Nordic must be rigorously pruned. But only the gods of the heavens are
Nordic!
   Whereas the Greek gods [he writes]'® were the heroes of light and of
   the heavens, the gods of non-Aryan Asia Minor assumed all the
                      NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS U         189

  characteristics of the Earth. . . . Dionysos (at least his non-Aryan
  side) is the god of ecstasy, of luxury, of the unfettered bac-
  chanal. . . . For two centuries, the interpretation of Greece has con-
  tinued. From Winckelmann through the German classics to Voss, there
  was an insistence on light, the gaze turned to the world, the intel-
  ligible. . . . The other—romantic—current was fed by the secondary
  movements indicated at the end of the /liad by the feast of the dead,
  or in Aeschylus by the actions of the Erinyes. It was fortified by the
  chthonian gods, established against the Olympian Zeus. Speaking of
  death and its enigmas, it venerated the mother-goddesses, and first
  among them Demeter, and it finally blossomed in the god of the
  dead—Dionysos. It is in this sense that Welcker, Rohde, and Nietzsche
  made the Earth-mother a creator of life who, herself unformed, perpet-
  ually returns through the death in her womb. High German romantic-
  ism shuddered with adoration and, as always darker veils were placed
  before the sky-god’s radiant face, it plunged ever more deeply into the
   instinctive, the unformed,   the demonical,   the sexual, the ecstatic, the
   chthonian—into the cult of the Mother.

There is good reason to recall here, first of all, that Rosenberg is not the official
philosopher of the Third Reich, and that his anti-Christian stance has not been
ratified. But when he expresses repulsion for the gods of the Earth and for the
romantic tendencies that do not have as their immediate goal a constitution of
force, he expresses beyond the shadow of a doubt the repulsion of National
Socialism itself.
    National Socialism is less romantic and more Maurrassian than is sometimes
imagined, and one must not forget that Rosenberg is its ideological expression
closest to Nietzsche; the jurist Carl Schmidt, who incarnates it just as much as
does Rosenberg,    is very close to Charles   Maurras   and,     with a Catholic back-
ground, has always been alien to the influence of Nietzsche.


                   A ‘‘Hygienic and Pedagogical Religion’’:
                              German Neopaganism

It is German ‘‘neopaganism’’'? that has introduced the legend of a poetic Na-
tional Socialism. It is only insofar as racism leads to this eccentric religious form
that it expresses a certain vitalist and anti-Christian current of German thought.
    It is a fact that a somewhat chaotic but organized belief freely represents
today in Germany the mystical current that first started during the period of high
romanticism, and is expressed in writings such as those by Bachofen, Nietzsche,
and more recently, Klages.?® Such a current has never had the slightest unity,
but it is characterized by the valuing of life over reason and by the opposition
of primitive religious forms to Christianity. Within National Socialism, Rosen-
berg today represents its most moderate tendency. Much more adventurous
theoreticians (Hauer, Bergmann), following Count Reventlow, have set them-
                       190 L] NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS

selves the task of establishing a cultural organization analogous to a Church.
This endeavor is not new in Germany, where a ‘“Community of the German
Faith’’ existed in 1908, and where General Ludendorff himself wanted to
become, after 1923, the head of a German Church. After Hitler took power the
various existing organizations recognized, in a congress, the community of their
goals, and were unified in order to form the ‘‘Movement of the German Faith.”’
    But if it is true that the proselytes of the new religion do not confine romantic
exaltation within Rosenberg’s narrow and totally military limits, they are no less
in agreement on the point that, once anti-Christianity is proclaimed and life is
divinized, the only religion will be race, in other words, Germany. The former
Protestant missionary Hauer screams: ‘‘There is only one virtue—to be
German!’’ And the extravagant Bergmann, enamored of psychoanalysis and of
the ‘‘hygienic religion,”’ affirms that ‘‘if Jesus of Nazareth, doctor and bene-
factor of the people, came back today, he would come down from the cross on
which a deceptive knowledge has kept him nailed; he would live again as the
doctor of the people, as the authority on racial hygiene.”’
    National Socialism only escapes traditional and pietistic narrowness in order
better to assure its mental poverty! The fact that adepts of the new faith have
ceremonies in the course of which passages from Zarathustra are read defini-
tively situates this comedy far from Nietzschean rigor; indeed it is nothing more
than the commonest phraseology of buffoons, who assert themselves every-
where amid general weariness.
    It 1s finally necessary to add that the leaders of the Reich do not appear in-
clined—appear less and less inclined—to support this unusual movement; the
account of the role played in Hitler’s Germany by a free, anti-Christian enthusi-
asm, which gives itself a Nietzschean appearance, thus ends on a note of shame.


                             More   Professorial   . . .

There remains—perhaps the most serious—the well-thought-out endeavor of
Herr Alfred Bäumler, who uses real knowledge and a certain theoretical rigor
to construct a political Nietzscheanism. Bäumler’s little book, Nietzsche, the
Philosopher and Politician,*' published by Reclam and widely disseminated,
draws out of the labyrinth of Nietzschean contradictions the doctrine of a people
united by a common will to power. Such a labor is in fact possible, and it was
inevitable that someone would do it. It sets forth, on the whole, a precise, new,
and remarkably artificial and logical figure. Imagine Nietzsche asking himself
just once: ‘‘“To what can my experiences and my perceptions be of use?”’
    That is in fact what Herr Baumler has not failed to ask in Nietzsche’s place.
And as it is impossible to be of use to that which does not exist, Herr Baumler
necessarily invokes the existence that has thrust itself on him, that should havc
thrust itself on Nietzsche, that of the community to which both of them were
                        NIETZSCHE    AND   THE   FASCISTS   O   191


destined by birth. Such considerations would be correct on the condition that the
hypothesis formulated were capable of having a meaning in the spirit of
Nietzsche. Another supposition remains possible: Nietzsche could not see his
experiences and perceptions as useful; instead, he saw them as an end. Just as
Hegel expected the Prussian state to realize Spirit, Nietzsche could have been
able—after vituperating it—to wait obscurely for Germany to give a body and
a real voice to Zarathustra . . . But it seems that the intellect of Herr Baumler,
more exacting than that of a Bergmann or an Oehler, eliminates overly comical
representations. He has thought it expedient to neglect those things that
Nietzsche incontestably experienced as an end and not as a means, and he has
neglected them overtly, through positive remarks.
   Nietzsche,    speaking   of the death   of God,   used   a disordered   language   that
manifested the most excessive inner experience.         Bäumler writes:
   To understand exactly Nietzsche’s attitude in regard to Christianity,
   one must never forget that the decisive expression ‘‘God is dead’’ has
   the meaning of a historical fact.

   Describing what he experienced the first time the vision of the eternal return
came to him, Nietzsche wrote: ‘‘The intensity of my feelings makes me both
tremble and laugh     . . . these were     not tears of tenderness,    but tears of jubi-
lation.   . . . 7’
   In reality [states Baumler], the idea of the eternal return is without
   importance from the point of view of Nietzsche’s system. We must
   consider it the expression of a highly personal experience. It has no
   connection with the fundamental idea of the will to power and even,
   taken seriously, this idea would shatter the coherence of the will to
   power.

   Of all the dramatic representations that have given Nietzsche’s life the char-
acter of a laceration and of the breathless combat of human           existence, the idea
of the eternal return is certainly the most inaccessible. But to go from the inabil-
ity to attain it to the resolution not to take it seriously is to follow the traitor’s
path. Mussolini recognized a long time ago that Nietzsche’s doctrine could not
be reduced to the idea of the will to power. In his way Herr Bäumler, on the
path of the traitor, recognizes this with an incomparable éclat—emasculating in
broad daylight . . .


                            The ‘‘Land of My Children”’
The pressing into service of Nietzsche requires, first of all, that all of his pathos-
laden experience be opposed by the system, and give way to the system. But its
requirements go much further than this.
                        192 O    NIETZSCHE   AND   THE    FASCISTS


    Baumler opposes the comprehension of Revolution with the comprehension
of myth; the first, according to him, would be linked to the awareness of the
future, the second to an intense feeling for the past.?? It goes without saying that
 nationalism implies an enslavement to the past. In an article in Esprit (November
 1, 1934, pp. 199-208), Emmanuel Lévinas?* has provided, on this point, a
 philosophical exposition of racism in particular that is more profound than that
 of its partisans. If we cite the essential part of the article here, the profound dif-
 ference between the teachings of Nietzsche and their bondage will perhaps
appear, this time in a fairly brutal way:
       The importance [writes Lévinas] accorded to this feeling for the
   body,   with which the Western      spirit has never been content,        is at the
   basis of a new biological conception of man. The biological, with all
   the fatality that it implies, becomes more than an object of spiritual
   life—it becomes its heart. The mysterious urgings of the blood, the
   call of heredity and of the past for which the body serves as an enig-
   matic   vehicle, lose their status as problems        submitted   for solution to a
   Self that is free in a sovereign way. The Self brings to their resolution
   only the very unknowns of this problem. It is constituted by them.
   Man’s essence is no longer in liberty, but in a kind of bondage. . . .
       From that point on, any social structure that announces a liberation
   in regard to the body and that does not tie it down becomes suspect,
   as a denial or a betrayal. . . . An inbred society immediately follows
   from this solidification of the spirit. . . . Any rational assimilation or
   mystical communion between minds that is not based on a blood-
   community is suspect. Nevertheless, the new type of truth cannot be
   capable of renouncing the formal nature of truth and of ceasing to be
   universal. The truth can very well be my truth in the strangest sense of
   this possessive—it must still tend toward the creation of a new world.
   Zarathustra is not content with his own transfiguration; he comes down
   from his mountain and carries a gospel. How can universality be com-
   patible with racism? There will be a fundamental modification of the
   very idea of universality. It must give way to the idea of expansion,
   for the expansion of a force presents a structure completely different
   from that of the propagation of an idea. . . . Nietzsche’s will to
   power, which modern Germany has rediscovered and glorified, is not
   only a new    ideal, it is an ideal that brings,      at the same time,   its own
   form of universalization: war and conquest.

   Lévinas,   who   introduces   (without attempting to justify it) the identification
of the Nietzschean attitude with the racist attitude, in fact limits himself to pro-
viding (without having attempted it) a striking demonstration of their incompat-
ibility and even of their nature as opposites.
    The blood-community?* and the enslavement to the past are, in their connec-
tion, as distant as possible from the outlook of a man who demanded with grcat
                       NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS        [J 193


pride to be known as the ‘‘stateless one.”” And the understanding of Nietzsche
must be seen as closed to those who do not completely take into account the pro-
found paradox of another name that he claimed with no less pride, that of the
CHILD OF THE FUTURE.? The understanding of myth linked by Baumiler to
an intense feeling for the past is countered by the Nietzschean myth of the future.?¢
The future, the marvelous unknown of the future, is the only object of the
Nietzschean celebration.?” ‘‘Humanity [in the thought of Nietzsche] still has
much more time before it than behind it—how, in a general way, could the ideal
be found in the past?’’2® It is only the aggressive and gratuitous gift of oneself
to the future—in opposition to reactionary avarice, bound to the past—that en-
ables the figure of Zarathustra, who demanded to be disowned, to present such
a strong image of Nietzsche. The ‘‘stateless ones,’’ those who live today, those
who have unchained themselves from the past, how can they relax and see
chained to this patriotic misery the one who, among them, through his hatred
of this misery, devoted himself to the LAND OF HIS CHILDREN? Zara-
thustra—when the gaze of others was fixed on the land of their fathers, on their
fatherland—Zarathustra saw the LAND OF HIS CHILDREN.?° Against this
world covered with the past, covered with fatherlands like a man is covered with
wounds, there is no greater, more paradoxical, more passionate expression.


                            ‘“We Who    Are Homeless’’

There is something tragic in the simple fact that Lévinas’s error is possible (for
it is no doubt a question in this case of an error, not of a prejudice). The contra-
dictions that are killing men suddenly appear strangely insoluble. For if opposed
parties, adopting opposed solutions, have in appearance resolved these contra-
dictions, it is only through gross simplifications—and these apparent solutions
only distance the possibility of escaping death. Those freed from the past are
chained to reason; those who do not enslave reason are the slaves of the past.
In order to constitute itself, the game of politics demands such false positions,
and it seems impossible to change them. Transgressing with one’s life the laws
of reason, answering even against reason the demands of life, is in practice, in
politics, to give oneself, bound hand and foot, to the past. Nevertheless, life
demands to be freed no less from the past than from a system of rational and
administrative measurements.
    The passionate and tumultuous movement that forms life, that responds to its
demand for the strange, the new, the lost, sometimes appears to be carried along
by political action—but that is only a matter of a brief illusion. Life’s movement
can only be merged with the limited movements of political formations in clearly
defined conditions;*° in other conditions, it goes far beyond them, precisely into
the region to which Nietzsche’s attention was drawn.
   Far beyond, where the simplifications adopted for a little while and for a
                           194 0 NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS

limited goal lose their meaning, existence and the universe that carries it again
appear to be a labyrinth. Toward this labyrinth, which alone encompasses the
numerous possibilities of life, and not toward immediate banalities, the contra-
dictory thought of Nietzsche is headed, at the mercy of a skittish liberty.*'
Alone, in the world as it now exists, it even seems to escape the pressing worries
that make us refuse to open our eyes wide enough. Those who already see the
void in the solutions proposed by parties, who even see nothing more in the hope
aroused by these parties than an occasion for wars lacking any fragrance but that
of death, seek a faith that corresponds to the convulsions they undergo: the pos-
sibility of man’s finding not a flag and the senseless butchery before which this
flag advances, but everything in the universe that can be an object of laughter,
of ecstasy, or of sacrifice .
       Our ancestors [wrote Nietzsche] were Christians who in their Chris-
   tianity were uncompromisingly upright: for their faith they willingly
   sacrificed possessions and position, blood and fatherland. We—do the
   same. For what? For our unbelief? For every kind of unbelief? No,
   you know better than that, friends! The hidden Yes in you is stronger
   than all the Nos and Maybes that afflict you and your age like a
   disease; and when you have to embark on the sea, you emigrants, you
   too are compelled to this by—a faith!??

    Nietzsche’s teachings elaborate the faith of the sect or the ‘“order’’ whose
dominating will creates a free human destiny, tearing it away from the rational
enslavement of production, as well as from the irrational enslavement to the
past. The revalued values must not be reduced to use value—this is a principle
of such burning, vital importance that it rouses all that life provides of a stormy
will to conquer. Outside of this well-defined resolution, these teachings only
give rise to inconsequential things or to the betrayals of those who pretend to
take them into account. Enslavement tends to spread throughout human exis-
tence, and it is the destiny of this free existence that is at stake.

                                               Notes

     1. Oeuvres Posthumes (trans. Bolle) (Paris: Mercure de France,    1934), section 858, p. 309.
    2. On Elisabeth Fôrster-Nietzsche, see the obituary by W. F. Otto in Kantstudien, no. 4, 1935,
p. v (two portraits); but better is Erich Podach’s L’Effondrement de Nietzsche (French translation)
(Paris: Gallimard, 1931); Podach confirms the truth of statements by Nietzsche about his sister
(“people like my sister are inevitably irreconcilable adversaries of my manner of thinking and of
my philosophy'’—cited by Podach, p. 68): the disappearance of documents, the shameful omissions
of the Nietzsche-Archiv can already be attributed to this singular ‘‘adversary.”
      3. Letter of 21 May 1887, published in French in Lettres choisies (Paris: Stock, 1931).
      4. The second of two letters to Theodor Fritsch, published in French by Marius Paul Nicolas
(De Hitler à Nietzsche [Paris: Fasquelle, 1936}, pp. 131-34). We must note here the valuc of
Nicolas's work, whose purpose is, on the whole, analogous to our own, and which provides impor
tant documents. But we must regret that the author is preoccupied above all with showing M. Julien
                           NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS                O   195

Benda that he should not be hostile to Nietzsche    . . . and hope that M. Benda remains faithful to
himself.
     S. Friedrich Nietzsche und die deutsche Zukunft (Leipzig,       1935). R. Oehler belongs to the
family of Nietzsche’s mother. [We quote here from the Walter Kaufmann translation of Beyond
Good and Evil (New York: Random House, 1966), p. 187. Tr.]
      6. In the first of two letters to T. Fritsch—see above, note 3.
      7. “Is there not a Hegelianism of left and right? There can be a Nietzscheanism of right and
left. And it seems to me that already Stalin’s Moscow and Rome, the latter consciously and the
 former unconsciously, pose these two Nietzscheanisms’’ (Pierre Drieu la Rochelle, Socialisme
fasciste {Paris: Gallimard, 1934], p. 71). In the article from which these lines are taken (entitled
 ‘*Nietzsche contre Marx’’), Drieu, while recognizing that ‘‘there will never be anything but a resi-
due of his thought that can be surrendered to a brutal exploitation by thugs,’ reduces Nietzsche to
the will to initiative and to the negation of optimism concerning progress .
    In fact, if not in principle, the distinction between the two Nietzscheanisms is no less justified
on the whole. Already in 1902, in an article entitled **Nietzsche malgré lui’’ (Journal des Débats,
3 September 1902), Bourdeau 1ronically spoke of left and right Nietzscheans.
     Jean Jaurès (who, in a lecture in Geneva, identified the superman with the proletariat), Bracke
(the translator of Human, All too Human), Georges Sorel, Felicien Challaye can be cited in France
as men on the left who were interested in Nietzsche.
     It is unfortunate that Jaurès’s lecture has been lost.
    Ît is important again to note that the principal work on Nietzsche is by Charles Andler, the sym-
pathetic editor of the Communist Manifesto. (Bataille refers here to Andler’s Nietzche, sa vie et sa
pensée (Paris: Bossard, 1920-31). Tr.]
      8. The Will to Power, section 1026. [Trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1967),
p. 531. Tr.]
      9. The Gay Science. [Trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1974), p. 340. Tr.]
     10. Nietzsche speaks of aristocracy, he even speaks of slavery, but, expressing himself on the
subject of ‘‘new masters,'’ he speaks of ‘‘their new holiness,’’ of their ‘“capacity for renunciation.””
‘“They give,'’ he writes, ‘“to the lowest the right to happiness, and they renounce it for themselves.’’
     l1. The Will to Power, section 942. [Kaufmann translation, p. 496—but we retain the French
translation’s ‘‘remarks for asses,’’ whereas Kaufmann has ‘‘parenthesis for asses.'’ Tr.].
                 +




     12. It is well known that Hegelianism, represented by Gentile, is practically the official philos-
ophy of Fascist Italy.
    13. Under ‘‘Fascismo.’’ The article has been translated as the first article of: Benito Mussolini,
Le Fascisme (Paris: Denoél et Steele, 1933).
    14. Mussolini writes with reference to the people: ‘‘It is a question neither of race nor of a defi-
nite geographical region, but of a group that endures through history, of a multitude unified by an
idea that is a will to existence and to power’’ (Denoél et Steele edition, p. 22).
     15. In an article published at the time in a newspaper in Romagna and reprinted by Marguerite
G. Sarfatti (Mussolini, French translation [Paris: Albin Michel, 1927], pp. 117-21).
     16. Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts (Munich, 1932), p. 523. [An English translation of this
work has very recently been published: The Myth of the Twentieth Century (Torrance, Calif.: Noon-
tide Press, 1982). Tr.]
     17. First letter to T. Fritsch, cited above, notes 3 and 6.
     !8. Der Mythus des 20. Jahrhunderts, p. 55. This hostility of fascism to the chthonian gods, to
the gods of the Earth, is no doubt what locates it most accurately in the psychological or mytho-
logical world.
    19. On German neopaganism, see the article by Albert Béguin in the Revue des Deux-Mondes,
15 May 1935.
    20. We should note that, referring to the contemporary writer Ludwig Klages, famous above all
                               196 O NIETZSCHE AND THE FASCISTS

for his work in characterology, Baron Ernest Seillière, (De la déesse nature à la déesse vie [Paris:
Alcan, 1931], p. 133) uses the expression acephalic . . . Klages is, moreover, the author of one
of the most important books to have been devoted to Nietzsche, Die psychologischen Errungen-
schaften Nietzsches, second edition (Leipzig, 1930) (first edition: 1923).
    21. Nietzsche, der Philosoph und Politiker (Leipzig, 1931); the two passages cited are on pp.
98 and 80.
       22. See Seillière, op. cit., p. 37.
       23. [The title of Lévinas’s article is ‘‘Quelques réflexions sur la philosophie de l’hitlerisme.”’
Tr.]
       24. Nietzsche is generally interested in the beauty of the body and in the race, without this inter-
est determining for him the privileging of a limited blood-community (whether fictive or not). The
community ties that he foresees are without any doubt mystical ties; it is a matter of a ‘‘faith,”’ not
of a fatherland.
    25. The Gay Science, section 377, entitled ‘“We Who Are Homeless.’’            [Kaufmann translation,
pp. 338-40. Tr.]
       26. Den Mythus der Zukunft dichten! writes Nietzsche in notes for Zarathustra (Werke, Grossok-
tavausgabe [Leipzig, 1901], vol. 12, p. 400).
    27. Die Zukunft feiern nicht die Vergangenheit! (from the same passage as the preceding quote);
Ich liebe die Unwissenheit um die Zukunft (The Gay Science, #287).
    28. Posthumous Works (Werke [Leipzig, 1901], vol. 13, p. 362).
    29. Thus Spoke Zarathustra, second part, ‘‘On the Land of Education’’: ‘‘and 1 am driven out
of fatherlands and motherlands. Thus I now love only my children’s land. . . . In my children I
want to make up for being the child of my fathers. . . . ’’ (Trans. W. Kaufmann, in The Portable
Nietzsche (New York: Viking, 1954), p. 233. Tr.]
     30. The Russian revolution perhaps shows what a revolution is capable of. The questioning of
all human reality in a reversal of the material conditions of existence suddenly appears as a response
to a pitiless demand, but it is not possible to foresee its consequences: revolutions thwart all intelli-
gent predictions of their results. Life’s movement no doubt has little to do with the more or less de-
pressing aftermath of a trauma. It is found in slowly active and creative obscure determinations, of
which the masses are not at first aware. It is above all wretched to confuse it with the readjustments
demanded by the conscious masses, carried out in the political sphere by more or less parliamentary
specialists.
     31. This interpretation of the ‘‘political thought’’ of Nietzsche, the only one possible, has been
remarkably well expressed by Karl Jaspers. The reader is referred to the passage that we cite in our
review of Jaspers’s book.      [Bataille’s review of Jaspers’s Nietzsche, Einführing in das Verständnis
seines Philosophierens (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1936), consists chiefly of a French translation (by Pierre
Klossowski) of a long quote from Jaspers’s book, which may be found on pp. 252-53 of the book’s
English translation: Nietzsche: An Introduction to the Understanding of His Philosophical Activity,
trans. C. F. Wallrath and F. J. Schmitz (Tucson:          The University of Arizona Press,      1965).   The
rcview itself may be found on pp. 474-76 of volume I of Bataille's Oeuvres Complètes. Tr.]
       32. This is the conclusion of section 377 of The Gay Science, ‘“We Who Are Homeless.’’ This
paragraph sums up more precisely than any other Nietzsche’s attitude toward contemporary political
reality.
Propositions




    When Nietzsche said he wanted to be understood in fifty years, he could not
have meant it in only the intellectual sense. That for which he lived and exalted
himself demands that life, joy, and death be brought into play, and not the tired
attention of the intellect. This must be stated simply and with an awareness of
one's own involvement. What takes place profoundly in the revaluation of val-
ues, in a decisive way, is tragedy itself; there is little room left for repose. That
the essential for human life is exactly the object of sudden horror, that this life
is carried in laughter to the heights of joy by the most degrading events possible,
such strange facts place human events, happening on the surface of the Earth,
in the conditions of mortal combat, making it necessary to break the bonds of
recognized truth in order to ‘‘exist.’’ But it is vain and unbearable to try to ad-
dress those who have at their disposal only a feigned attention; combat has al-
ways been a more demanding enterprise than any other. In this sense it becomes
impossible to shy away from a meaningful comprehension of the teachings of
Nietzsche. All this leads to a slow development where nothing can be left in the
shadows.


                           I. Propositions on Fascism
   1. ‘“The most perfect organization of the universe can be called God. 991
   The fascism that recomposes society on the basis of existing elements 1s the
most closed form of organization; in other words, the form of human existence
closest to the eternal God.

                                         197
                               198 L] PROPOSITIONS

    In social revolution (but not in Stalinism as it exists today) decomposition
conversely reaches its extreme point.
    Existence 1s constantly situated in opposition to two equally illusory possibil-
ities: an ‘‘ewige Vergottung und Entgottung,’’ in other words an ‘“eternal inte-
gration that deifies (that produces God), and an eternal disintegration that annihi-
lates God in itself.””
    The destroyed social system recomposes itself by slowly developing an aver-
sion to the initial decomposition.
    The recomposed social structure—whether the result of fascism or of a negat-
ing revolution—paralyzes the movement of existence, which demands a constant
disintegration. The great unitary constructions are only the warning signs of a
religious upheaval that will push life’s movement beyond servile necessity.
   The charm,   in the toxic sense of the word, of Nietzschean exaltation comes
from its disintegration of life, while carrying it to the overflow of the will to
power and irony.

    2. With regard to the community, the character of the individual as substitute
is one of the rare certainties that emerges from historical research. It is from
the unitary community that the person takes his form and his being. The most
opposed crises have led, before our eyes, to the formation of similar unitary
communities: thus in these there was neither social sickness nor regression;
instead, societies rediscovered their fundamental mode of existence, their time-
less structure as it was formed or reformed in the most diverse economic or his-
torical circumstances.
    The protest of human beings against a fundamental law of their existence can
evidently have only a limited significance. Democracy, which rests on a precar-
ious equilibrium between classes, is perhaps only a transitory form; it brings
with it not only the grandeur but the pettiness of decomposition.
   The protest against unitarism does not necessarily take place in a democratic
sense. It is not necessarily done in the name of a within; the possibilities of
human existence can from now on be situated beyond the formation of mono-
cephalic societies.
    3. Recognizing the limited scope of democratic rage (in large part deprived
of meaning because the Stalinists share it) does not mean in any way the accep-
tance of a unitary community. Relative stability and conformity to natural law
in no way confer on a political form the possibility of stopping the movement
of ruin and creation of history, still less of satisfying in a single moment the de-
mands of life. On the contrary, closed and stifling social existence is condemned
to the condensation of forces of decisive explosion, which cannot be carried out
within a democratic society. But it would be a crude error to imagine that the
exclusive, and even simply the necessary, goal of an explosive thrust is to
destroy the head and the unitary structure of a society. The formation of a new
structure, Of an ‘‘order’’ developing and raging across the entire earth, is the
                                PROPOSITIONS    [J 199

only truly liberating act, and the only one possible, since revolutionary destruc-
tion is regularly followed by the reconstitution of the social structure and its
head.

    4. Democracy rests on a neutralization of relatively free and weak antagon-
isms; it excludes all explosive condensation. Monocephalic society ts the result
of the free play of the natural laws of man, but each time it is a secondary forma-
tion, it represents a crushing atrophy and sterility of existence.
    The only society full of life and force, the only free society, is the bi- or poly-
cephalic society that gives the fundamental antagonisms of life a constant ex-
plosive outlet, but one limited to the richest forms.
    The duality or multiplicity of heads tends to achieve in the same movement
the acephalic character of existence, because the very principle of the head is
the reduction to unity, the reduction of the world to God.

    5. ‘““Inorganic matter is the maternal breast. To be released from life is once
again to become true; it is to perfect oneself. Whoever understands this would
consider the return to insensate dust as a celebration.’’?
    ““To grant perception also to the inorganic world; an absolutely precise per-
ception—the reign of ‘truth’!—Uncertainty and illusion start with the organic
world.”’?
    ‘“Loss of all specialization: synthetic nature is superior nature. But all organic
life is already a specialization. The inorganic world found behind it represents
the greatest synthesis of forces; for this reason, it seems worthy of the greatest
respect. In the inorganic, error and the limitations of perspective do not exist.’’*
   These three texts, the first summarizing    Nietzsche, the other two taken from
his posthumous writings, reveal at the same time the conditions of the splendor
and poverty of existence. To be free means not to be a function. To allow oneself
to be locked in a function is to allow life to emasculate itself. The head, con-
scious authority or God, represents one of the servile functions that gives itself
as, and takes itself to be, an end; consequently, it must be the object of the most
inveterate aversion. One limits the extent of this aversion, however, by giving
it as the principle of the struggle against unitary political systems: but it is a
question of a principle outside of which such a struggle is only a contradiction
in terms.


                     II. Propositions on the Death of God
ooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo




   6. The acephalic man      mythologically expresses sovereignty committed to
destruction and the death of God, and in this the identification with the headless
man merges and melds with the identification with the superhuman, which IS
entirely ‘‘the death of God.”’
                               200 OJ PROPOSITIONS

    7. Superman and acephalic man are bound with a brilliance equal to the posi-
tion of time as imperative object and explosive liberty of life. In both cases, time
becomes the object of ecstasy, and, secondly, it appears as the ‘‘eternal return”’
in the vision of Surlei or as ‘‘catastrophe’’ (*‘Sacrifices’’), or again as *‘time-
explosion’’: it is, then, as different from the time of philosophers (or even from
Heideggerian time) as the christ of erotic saints is from the God of the Greek
philosophers. The movement directed toward time suddenly enters into concrete
existence, whereas the movement toward God turned away from it during the
earliest period.

   8. Ecstatic time can only find itself in the vision of things that puerile chance
causes brusquely to appear: cadavers, nudity, explosions, spilled blood,
abysses, sunbursts, and thunder.

   9. War, to the extent that it is the desire to insure the permanence of a nation,
the nation that is sovereignty and the demand for inalterability, the authority of
divine right and of God himself, represents the desperate obstinacy of man
opposing the exuberant power of time and finding security in an immobile and
almost somnolent erection. National and military life are present in the world
to try to deny death by reducing it to a component of a glory without dread.
Nation and army profoundly separate man from a universe given over to lost
expenditure and to the unconditional explosion of its parts: ‘“profoundly,’’ at
least to the extent that the precarious victories of human avarice are possible.

    10. Revolution must not only be considered in its overtly known and con-
scious ins and outs, but in its brute appearance, whether it is the work of Puri-
tans, Encyclopedists, Marxists, or Anarchists. Revolution, in its significant his-
torical existence, which still dominates the present civilization, manifests itself
to the eyes of a world mute with fear as the sudden explosion of limitless riots.
Because of the Revolution, divine authority ceases to found power; authority no
longer belongs to God, but to time, whose free exuberance puts kings to death,
to time incarnated today in the explosive tumult of peoples. Even in fascism
itself authority has been reduced to founding itself on a so-called revolution—a
hypocritical and forced homage to the only imposing authority, that of cata-
strophic change.

    11. God, kings, and their sequels have interposed themselves between men
and the Earth—in the same way that the father stands before the son as an ob-
stacle to the violation and possession of the Mother. The economic history of
modern times is dominated by the epic but disappointing effort of fierce men to
plunder the riches of the Earth. The Earth has been disemboweled, but men have
reaped from her womb above all metal and fire, with which they ceaselessly dis-
embowel each other. The inner incandescence of the Earth not only explodes in
the craters of volcanoes; it also glows red and spits out death with its fumes in
the metallurgy of all nations.
                                     PROPOSITIONS       O 201

    12. The incandescent reality of the Earth’s womb cannot be touched and pos-
sessed by those who misunderstand it. It is the misunderstanding of the Earth,
the forgetting of the star on which he lives, the ignorance of the nature of riches,
in other words of the incandescence that is enclosed within this star, that has made
for man an existence at the mercy of the merchandise he produces, the largest
part of which is devoted to death. As long as men forget the true nature of
terrestrial life, which demands ecstatic drunkenness and splendor, nature can
only come to the attention of the accountants and economists of all parties by
abandoning them to the most complete results of their accounting and economics.

    13. Men do not know how to enjoy the Earth and her products freely and with
prodigality; the Earth and her products only lavish and liberate themselves in
order to destroy. Dull war, such as that organized by modern economies, also
teaches the meaning of the Earth, but it teaches it to renegades whose heads are
full of calculations and plans for the short run; that is why it teaches it with a
heartless and depressing rage. In the measureless and rending character of the
aimless catastrophe known as modern warfare, it is nevertheless possible for us
to recognize the explosive immensity of time. The Earth as mother has remained
the old chthonian deity, but with the human multitudes she also tears down the
God of the sky in an endless uproar.

    15.° The    search   for God,     for the absence of movement,                for tranquillity,   is
the fear that has scuttled all attempts at a universal community. Man’s heart is
uneasy not only up to the moment when he finds repose in God: God’s universal-
ity still remains for him a source of uneasiness, and peace is produced only if
God allows himself to be locked up in the isolation and profoundly immobile
permanence of a group’s military existence. For universal existence is unlimited
and thus restless: it does not close life in on itself, but instead opens it and throws
it back into the uneasiness of the infinite. Universal existence, eternally un-
finished and acephalic, a world like a bleeding wound, endlessly creating and
destroying particular finite beings: it is in this sense that true universality is the
death of God.

                                                Notes

     1. Section 712, The Will to Power, trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Random             House,   1967),
pp. 379-80.
     2. See Charles Andler’s Nietzsche, sa vie et sa pensée, vol. 6 (Paris: Gallimard, 1931), p. 307,
and the Posthumous Works, period of The Gay Science (1881-82), sections 497 and 498 (Werke,
Grossoktavausgabe [Leipzig, 1901], vol. 12, p. 228).
     3. Posthumous Works, 1883-88 (Grossoktavausgabe, vol.         13, p. 228).
     4. Ibid., same page.
     S. [No number 14 was included in the original text. Tr.]
Nietzschean                 Chronicle?




      The current crisis is the same as the one that threatened human
      nature at the time of the establishment of Christianity.
                                                        Benjamin Constant?


                    The Apogee of Civilization Is a Crisis
Each time a vast movement of civilization has developed, in Egypt or in the
Greco-Roman world, in China or in the Occident, the values that brought men
together at the dawn of each upheaval, the taboo or sacred acts, places, names,
and laws, have slowly lost, more or less on the whole,* a part of their efficacious
force and their ability to inspire awe. The simple fact of the movement itself was
decomposition and, in this sense, civilization can be seen as synonymous with
sickness or crisis. The two meanings, passive and active, of the word critical—
questioned and questioning—adequately and clearly account for the identifica-
tion that must be made between a developing civilization and crisis. On the pas-
sive side, there is the crisis of the conventions—the royal or divine sover-
eignty—that constitute the foundations of the human aggregate; on the active
side, there is the individual critical attitude toward these conventions: the indi-
vidual thus develops in a corrosive way, at the expense of society, and the facili-
tated individual life sometimes takes on a dramatic meaning. The figure of the
living community little by little loses its tragic appearance—both puerile and
terrible—which reached each being in his most secretly lacerated wound; it loses

                                         202
                        NIETZSCHEAN    CHRONICLE    ©   203


the power of provoking the total religious emotion that grows to the point of
ecstatic drunkenness, when existence is avidly opened before it.
    But because the material organization that has developed demands the conser-
vation of social cohesion, this cohesion is maintained by all the means at the
disposal of its principal beneficiaries; when communal passion is not great
enough to constitute human strengths, it becomes necessary to use constraint and
to develop the alliances, contracts, and falsifications that are called politics.
When human beings become autonomous they discover around themselves a
false and empty world. The awareness of being a dupe before administrative
impudence (and also before terrifying displays of individual satisfaction and
stupidity) succeeds the strong and painful feeling of communal unity. The vast
results of long centuries of struggle, of prodigious military or material conquest,
have always led conquering peoples—whether in the West, or among the Egyp-
tians or the Romans*—to a failed and disappointing world, flattened by inter-
minable crises. Through an extreme malaise and through a confusion in which
everything appears vain and nearly disastrous, there grows the obsession with


                       The Recovery of the Lost World
Decomposition can affect, at the same time, economic          activity, the institutions
of authority, and the principles that establish moral and religious attitudes. Dis-
integrated societies, obscurely attempting to regain their cohesion, can still be
devastated by a multiplicity of useless endeavors: brutal force and intellectual
pedantry, both equally blind, find the road wide open before them. The exces-
sive and shattered joy of great disasters can therefore relieve existence, like a
hiccup. But behind the facade constituted by affirmations of strength, reason,
and cynicism, there is a yawning void, and whatever continues gives way more
and more to the feeling that something is missing. Nostalgia for a lost world can
be clothed in numerous forms, and generally it is the feat of cowards, who only
know how to moan for what they claim to love, who avoid or know how not
to find the possibility of FIGHTING. Behind the facade, there is first of all only
nervous depression, violent but incoherent noise, aesthetic reverie and chatter.
When a man among others, in this world in which a simple representation of
the act has become an object of nausea, tries to enter into combat for the ‘‘re-
covery of the lost world,’’ he creates a void around himself, he meets only the
infinite evasion of all those who have taken upon themselves the task of knowl-
edge and of thought—for it is almost impossible to imagine a man who thinks
without having the constant worry of elminating from the course of his reflec-
tions everything that could condense and threaten to explode. Because he could
not confuse emasculation with knowledge, and because his thought was open to
a lucid explosion that could not stop before exhausting his resources—becoming
the hero of everything human that is not enslaved—Nietzsche collapsed in humil-
                         204 O NIETZSCHEAN      CHRONICLE

iating solitude. The destiny of human life, since it is linked to what is most signi-
ficant for all men, has perhaps never known a moment that justifies a greater
uneasiness than the one in which Nietzsche, alone and in a fit of madness, em-
braced a horse in the streets of Turin.


                               The Fascist Solution

But the close connection between the will to regain lost life and enervating
mental depression is not only the occasion for tragic failures: it constitutes an
incentive to grasp at the vulgar and facile solutions whose success at first seems
assured, to the exclusion of all others. Since it is a question of regaining what
existed in the past, and whose elements are dying or dead, it is simplest to
revive, in favorable circumstances, what already exists. It is easier to restore
than to create, and since the necessity of a renewed social cohesion can, at cer-
tain moments, be felt in the most pressing way, the first movement of recompo-
sition takes place in the form of a return to the past. The crudest and most
directly usable fundamental values are capable, in bitter and hateful crises, of
taking on a dramatic meaning that seems to restore real color to communal exis-
tence, whereas on the whole it is a matter of an operation in which the affective
values set in motion are in large part used for ends other than themselves. The
RECOMPOSITION OF SACRED VALUES starts® when the boots of human
existence are repaired, and it can obediantly march straight ahead once again
under the whip of hard necessity. The reestablished Pharaohs and Caesars, the
heads of the revolutionary parties that today have betwitched half the inhabitants
of Europe, have answered the desire to base life again on an irrational urge. But
the amount of constraint necessary for the maintenance of too rapidly imposed
edifices indicates their profoundly disappointing character. To the extent that
there persists a nostalgia for a community through which each being would find
something more tragically taut than anything to be found in himself—to this
extent the concern for the recovery of the lost world, which played a role in the
genesis of fascism, has as its outcome nothing other than military discipline and
a limited calm, produced by a brutality that destroys with rage everything it
lacks the power to captivate.
    But what is adequate to a possibly dominant faction is nothing more than
sundering and deception when one considers the entire living community of
beings. The community does not demand a fate similar to that of the different
parts it brings together, but it demands as an end that which violently unifies
and asserts itself without alienating life, without leading it to the repetition of
emasculated acts and of external moral formulae. Brief bursts of fascism, set off
by fear, cannot deceive such a true, wild, and avid demand.
                           NIETZSCHEAN       CHRONICLE     U   205


              From the Caesarian Heavens to the Dionysian Earth:
                            The Religious Solution
If one now imagines the obsession that dominated Nietzsche’s life, it seems clear
that this common obsession with the lost world, which grows greater in pro-
found depression, can necessarily be followed in opposite directions. The con-
fusion between two responses to the same void, the apparent similarity of fas-
cism and Nietzsche, then becomes easily understandable: any resemblance is
reduced to identical traits appearing in two opposites.

   Among the various oppositions that maintain the existence of men under the
harsh   law   of Heraclitus,     none   is truer or more   ineluctable   than the one   that
opposes the Earth to the heavens, to the ‘‘need to punish’’ the dark demands of
tragedy; on one side are constituted the aversion to sin and the light of day, glory
and military repression, the imprescriptible rigidity of the past; on the other, the
grandeur of auspicious nights, of avid passion, of the obscure and free dream—
power is given to movement and, in that way, whatever its numerous appear-
ances may be, it is torn from the past and projected into the apocalyptic forms
of the future. On one side a constitution of communal forces riveted to a narrow
tradition—parental or racial—constitutes a monarchical authority and establishes
itself as a stagnation and as an insurmountable barrier to life; on the other, a
bond of fraternity, which may be foreign to the bond of blood, is established
between men, who among themselves decide upon the necessary consecrations:
and the goal of their meeting is not a clearly defined action, but life itself—LIFE,
IN OTHER WORDS, TRAGEDY.

   It is true that, when       it comes to man,   there are no examples of a real form
representing, to the exclusion of the other, one of the possible directions of life:
these directions are nevertheless easy to determine and describe. On the whole,
they set the chthonian and Uranian world of mythic Greece (and, in the phases
of recomposition of each great civilization, in a clearer and clearer way, the
properly religious movements—Osirian, Christian, or Buddhist) in opposition to
the development of the character of the military sovereign.
    The thing that has prevented people from immediately seeing how
Nietzsche’s representation of values opposes the eternal resumption of military
monarchy—a resumption that takes place with an empty regularity, without ever
providing anything new—has been Nietzsche’s effort to point out the deepest
differences less between Dionysianism and Bismarckian National Socialism (a
movement which, for good reason, he saw as negligible) than between Diony-
sianism and Christianity. And the possibility of error is even greater in that the
critique of Christian falsehoods led Nietzsche to rail against any renunciation of
power, leading in that way to a confusion between the sphere of military solidifi-
                        206 L] NIETZSCHEAN      CHRONICLE


cation and ossification and that of tragic liberty. And even greater in that there
can be no question of renouncing a hard-won human virility: the scorn for
Caesarian acts, deprived of all human meaning, will no longer lead to the accep-
tance of boundaries that these acts claim to impose on life; a religious movement
that develops in the present world no more has to resemble Christianity or Bud-
dhism than Christianity and Buddhism resembled polytheism. It is because of
this necessary dissimilarity that Nietzsche set aside, for good reason, the word
religion, which alone lends itself to a confusion almost as unfortunate as the con-
fusion between Nietzschean Dionysianism and fascism—and a word that can
only be used,   in the present world,   in defiance.


                               Nietzsche Dionysos

THE CRITICAL PHASE OF A CIVILIZATION’S DECOMPOSITION IS
REGULARLY FOLLOWED BY A RECOMPOSITION, WHICH DEVELOPS
IN TWO       DIFFERENT       DIRECTIONS:       THE    RECONSTITUTION          OF
RELIGIOUS ELEMENTS OF CIVIL AND MILITARY SOVEREIGNTY,
TYING EXISTENCE TO THE PAST, IS FOLLOWED OR ACCOMPANIED
BY THE BIRTH OF FREE AND LIBERATING SACRED FIGURES AND
MYTHS, RENEWING LIFE AND MAKING IT ‘‘THAT WHICH FROLICS
IN THE FUTURE,” ““THAT WHICH ONLY BELONGS TO A FUTURE.
    The Nietzschean audacity demanding for the figures it creates a power that
bows before nothing—that tends to break down old sovereignty’s edifice of
moral prohibition—must not be confused with what it fights. The marvelous
Nietzschean KINDERLAND is nothing less than the place where the chal-
lenging of every man’s VATERLAND takes on a meaning that is no longer
impotent negation. It is only after Zarathustra that we can ‘‘ask our children’s
forgiveness for our having been the children of our fathers.’’® The very first
sentences of Nietzsche’s message come from ‘‘realms of dream and intoxica-
tion.’’” The entire message is expressed by one name: DIONYSOS. When
Nietzsche made DIONYSOS (in other words, the destructive exuberance of life)
the symbol of the will to power, he expressed in that way a resolution to deny
to a faddish and debilitating romanticism the force that must be held sacred.
Nietzsche demanded that the possessors of today’s shattering values become
dominant—and not that they be dominated by a heaven laden with the need to
punish.
    The god of the Earth, DIONYSOS, was the son of Semele, the Earth, and
Zeus, god of the Heavens. The myth has it that Semele, pregnant with Dionysos,
wanted Zeus to appear to her clothed in the attributes of his power; she was
reduced to flames and ashes by the heavenly thunder and lightning she had so
imprudently provoked. Thus the god was born of a lightning-torn womb.
                            NIETZSCHEAN        CHRONICLE        U    207


    In the image of the one he wanted to be to the point of madness, Nietzsche
is born of the Earth torn open by the fire of the Heavens, he is born blasted by
lightning and in that way he is imbued with this fire of domination that becomes
the FIRE OF THE EARTH.

  WHEN    THE    SACRED—NIETZSCHEAN—FIGURE    OF  TRAGIC
DIONYSOS RELEASES LIFE FROM SERVITUDE, IN OTHER WORDS,
FROM THE PUNISHMENT OF THE PAST, HE RELEASES IT AS WELL
FROM   RELIGIOUS   HUMILITY, FROM  THE  CONFUSIONS   AND
TORPOR OF ROMANTICISM. HE DEMANDS THAT A BRILLIANT WILL
RETURN THE EARTH TO THE DIVINE ACCURACY OF THE DREAM.


                           The     Performance       of Numantia®

The opposition of Heaven and Earth has ceased to have a meaningful, com-
munal, and immediately intelligible value. When it appears, it comes up against
the desires of the intellect, which no longer knows what such an antiquity is sup-
posed to mean, and which refuses to admit as well that mythological entities can
have, at the present time, in a world saturated with science, any meaning at all.
But    if one considers    an everyday        reality,   only   favorable circumstances        are
needed for men,     who are obviously a long way from madness,                   to enter lucidly
into the world of the infernal spirits—and not only men, but the vulgar political
passions that animate them.
      When   Marquino,    coming    forward     in his cowl,        calls forth the most   somber
things of the worid, the figures he invokes with terrible names . . . waters of
the black lagoon . . . cease to be empty and powerless representations. For,
in Numantia’s agony,       within the walls and under the naked               rock of the sierra,
it is the Earth that is there: the Earth that opens to return the cadaver to the world
of the living, the Earth that opens to the living, thrown by delirium into death.
And even though this Earth breathes Fury and Rage, even though it appears in
the screams of children slaughtered by their fathers, of wives slaughtered by
their husbands, even though the bread it brings the starving man is soaked in
blood, the feeling its presence inspires is not horror. Because those who belong
to it (and thus who belong to frenzy) bring back to life, before our eyes, all of
lost humanity, the world of truth and immediate passion for which nostalgia has
always been felt. And it is impossible to break apart a profoundly constituted
and bound figure. Just as the Romans, commanded by the implacable authority
of a leader, are associated with the glory of the sun, in the same way the
Numantines, WITHOUT           A LEADER,          WITHOUT            A HEAD,    are located in the
region of the Night and of the Earth, in the region haunted by the phantoms of
the Tragedy-Mother. And insofar as agony and death have entered the city, this
                              208 [0 NIETZSCHEAN    CHRONICLE


city becomes the image of everything in the world that can demand a total love;
insofar as this city dies, all the nostalgia for the lost world can now be expressed
by the single name, NUMANTIA.


                                   ‘“‘Numantia! Liberty!’’®
The tragedy of Numantia is great because in it one is confronted not only with
the death of a certain number of men, but with the entry of death into the entire
city: it is not individuals who are dying, but an entire people. That must be dis-
concerting, and in principle it must make Numantia inaccessible, because the
game destiny plays with men can only appear to most of them clothed in the bril-
liant colors of individual existence.
    Moreover, what is currently in the air—if one is speaking of collective
existence—is the poorest thing one can imagine, and no representation can be
more disconcerting than one that presents death as the fundamental object of the
communal activity of men, death and not food or the production of the means
of production. No doubt such a representation is based on the totality of religious
practices of all ages, but there has been a predominant tendency to see the reality
of religion as a surface reality. In the existence of a community, that which 1s
typically religious, in the sure grip of death, has become the thing most foreign
to man. No one thinks any longer that the reality of a communal life—which 1s
to say, human existence—depends on the sharing of nocturnal terrors and on the
kind of ecstatic spasms that spread death. Thus the truth of Numantia is even
more difficult to grasp than that of an individual tragedy. It is religious truth—in
other words, that which in principle rejects the inertia of men living today.
    The idea of a fatherland  — which appears as a constituent of dramatic action—
has only an external meaning, if one compares it to this religious truth. What-
ever their appearance, the symbols that govern the emotions are not among those
that serve to represent or maintain the military existence of a people. Military
existence even excludes any dramatization of this kind. It is based on a brutal
negation of any profound meaning of death and, if it uses cadavers, it is only
to make the living march in a straighter line. The most tragic performance
it knows is the parade and, due to the fact that it excludes all possible de-
pression, it is incapable of basing communal life on the tragedy of dread. In
this   sense   the   fatherland,   condemned   to accept   as   its own   a brutal   military
poverty, is far from equal to the communal unity of men. In certain cases it can
become a force of attraction destroying the other possibilities, but since it 1s
essentially constituted by armed force, it can give to those who submit to its
force of attraction nothing that satisfies the great human hungers, because it sub-
ordinates everything to a particular utility. On the contrary, it must force its
half-seduced lovers to enter the inhuman and totally alienated world of barracks,
military prisons, and military administrations. In the crisis currently depressing
                         NIETZSCHEAN    CHRONICLE     {J 209

existence, the fatherland even represents the greatest obstacle to this unity of life
that—it must be forcefully said—can only be based on a communal awareness
of profound existence, the emotional and riven play of life with death.

   Numantia,   which   is only the atrocious expression of this play, cannot have
any more meaning for the fatherland than it has for the individual who suffers
alone. But Numantia, in fact, took on for those present at the spectacle a
meaning that had to do neither with individual drama nor with national feeling,
but with political passion. This was made possible by the war in Spain. That is
an obvious paradox, and it is possible that such a confusion is as lacking in
importance as the confusion of the inhabitants of Saragossa, who presented the
tragedy during a siege. Numantia, today, has been performed not only in Paris,
but in Spain, in burned-out churches, without any other decor than the traces
of the fire, and without any other actors than red militiamen.     The fundamental
themes of a remote existence, the cruel and unalterable mythological themes
developed in the tragedy—are they not, however, as foreign to the political spirit
as they are to the military spirit?

    If it were necessary to hold to current appearances, the answer would have
to be in the affirmative. Not only does a politician, of whatever party, find
repugnant the consideration of profound realities, but he has accepted, once and
for all, the game of alterations and compromises that makes possible precarious
power alliances, and that makes impossible the formation of a true heartfelt
community.
    In addition, among the various convulsive conflicts in history, the one cur-
rently sundering the totality of civilized countries—the conflict between anti-
fascism and fascism—appears the most corrupt. The comedy which—under the
pretense of democracy—opposes German Caesarism with Soviet Caesarism,
shows what frauds are acceptable to a mob limited by misery, at the mercy of
those who basely flatter it.
    Nevertheless a reality exists which, behind this facade, is in contact with the
most powerful secrets of existence; anyone who wants to enter this reality need
only take in the opposite way what is generally accepted. If the image of
Numantia expresses the grandeur of a people struggling against oppression by
the powerful, it reveals at the same time that the struggle currently engaged in
most often lacks any grandeur: the antifascist movement, if it is compared to
Numantia, appears to be an empty mob, a vast decomposition of men linked on}y
by what they refuse.                                            |
    There is only illusion and comfort in admiring Numantia because one sees
in it an expression of the current struggle. But tragedy confronts the world of
politics with an evident truth: the battle joined will only take on a meaning and
will only be effective to the extent that fascist wretchedness comes face to face
                           210 O NIETZSCHEAN        CHRONICLE

with something other than troubled negation—namely, the heartfelt community
of which Numantia is the image.
    The principle of this reversal can be expressed in simple terms.
CAESARIAN        UNITY, ESTABLISHED BY A LEADER—A                       HEAD—IS
OPPOSED BY THE HEADLESS COMMUNITY, BOUND TOGETHER BY
THE OBSESSIVE IMAGE OF A TRAGEDY. Life demands that men gather
together, and men are only gathered together by a leader or by a tragedy. To
look for a HEADLESS human community 1s to look for tragedy: putting the
leader to death is itself tragedy, it remains a requirement of tragedy. A truth that
will change the appearance of human things starts here: THE EMOTIONAL
ELEMENT THAT GIVES AN OBSESSIVE VALUE TO COMMUNAL LIFE
IS DEATH.


                                The Dionysian Mysteries
This ‘‘Dionysian’’ truth cannot be an object of propaganda. And since, by its
own movement, it calls forth power, it gives meaning to the idea of an organiza-
tion revolving around profound mysteries.
    ‘“Mystery’’ here has nothing in common with a vague esotericism: it is a
question of lacerating truths that absorb those to whom they belong, truths that
the mob does not seek, and away from which it even tends to move. The dis-
integration-movement of this mob can only be countered by a crafty delibera-
tion, by what revolves once again around figures of death.
   It is only on this open route, where everything is disorienting to the point of
drunkenness, that Sade’s paradoxical assertions cease to be, for whoever accepts
them, a mockery and an implacable judgment.
   For men who do not want to follow a consistent and difficuit path, what could
the following quote mean?

   An already old and corrupt nation, courageously shaking off the yoke
   of its monarchical government in order to adopt a republican one, can
   only maintain itself through many crimes, for it is already in
   crime. . . .

   Or this one    . ..

   From these first principles, there follows . . . the necessity of soften-
   ing laws, and above all of annihilating for all time the atrocity of the
   death   penalty,   because   the law,   which   in itself is cold,   cannot be
   accessible to the passions that legitimate in man the cruel activity of
   murder.

     Still, those are the least clearly inhuman of Sade’s assertions. How could his
bloody doctrine have a meaning for anyone who, finding it right, does not live
it in trembling? For “‘killing for pleasure’’ would only be a literary provocation,
                              NIETZSCHEAN        CHRONICLE       0O 211

and the most inadmissible expression of hypocrisy, if consciousness were not
driven by it to a point of extreme lucidity. The awareness of the fact that the
pleasure of killing is the truth, charged with horror, for one who does not kill,
can remain neither obscure nor tranquil, and it forces life into an unlikely,
frozen world, where it tears itself apart.
   What else could be the meaning of the fact that, for a number of years, some
of the most gifted men did their utmost to shatter their own intellects, hoping
in this way to make the intellect itself explode? Dada is generally seen as an
unimportant failure, whereas, for others, it becomes liberating laughter, a reve-
lation that transfigures human being.
    And as for Nietzsche’s glances into the abyss, isn’t it time to call to account
those for whom they have only been the object of an eclectic curiosity? Many
realities are subject to the law of all or nothing. This is the case with Nietzsche.
The Spiritual Exercises of Saint Ignatius of Loyola would be nothing if they were
not meditated in the greatest silence (and meditated, they are a prison without
an exit). What Nietzsche shattered can only be opened to those carried forward
by the need to shatter; the others do to Nietzsche what they do to everything else:
nothing has meaning for them, and everything they touch decomposes. It is a
law of present-day life that an ordinary man must be incapable of thinking about
anything at all, and be tied down in every way by completely servile occupa-
tions, which drain him of reality. But the existence of this man will end up
crumbling into dust, and one day he will no longer be astonished when a living
being does not see him as the ultimate limit of things.

                                                Notes

      1. Continuation of the article that appeared in the January number, entitled ‘‘Nietzsche and the
Fascists.”” This chronicle will be continued. [But the suspension of Acéphale prevented this continu-
ation. Tr.]
      2. This cyclical representation of history is in reality the current view. Chateaubriand, Vigny,
George Sand, Renan all expressed themselves in the same way on the subject of Christianity.
    Engels developed at great length the principle of the similarity between the earliest period of
Christianity and the nineteenth century (see ‘‘On the Early History of Christianity’’). {In Marx and
Engels: Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy, ed. Lewis Feuer (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday
Anchor Books, 1959). Tr.]
   Nietzsche, seeing himself as the Antichrist and seeing the time in which he lived as a summit
of history, also imagined a cyclical movement of things. But for Nietzsche, there was in a certain
sense a return to the world that Socrates and Christianity had destroyed (see the review of the book
by Lowith, in Acéphale, January, p. 31). [Bataille refers here to a review of Karl Lowith’s book
Nietzsches Philosophie der ewigen Wiederkunft des Gleichen (Berlin: Die Runde, 1935), by Pierre
Klossowski, in Acéphale 2 (1937). Tr.]
    It is unfortunate that the cyclical conception of history has been discredited by occuitism and by
Spengler. It can take shape, however, as soon as it is based on a simple and obvious principle. It
will necessarily be linked to a SOCIOLOGICAL INTERPRETATION OF HISTORY—socio-
logical, in other words, separated from both economic materialism and moral idealism.
      3. Continuous adjustments have not been able to prevent the continuous downward slide.
     4. In the Egyptian civilization, individual values, which were, strictly speaking, nonexistent at
                               212 00 NIETZSCHEAN           CHRONICLE

the beginning of the third millennium (in the period of the great pyramids), appear to have been well
developed eight or ten centuries later, in a period of social revolutions tending toward nihilism (see
Alexandre Moret, Le Nil et la civilisation égyptienne {Paris, 1926]. pp. 251ff. and 292ff.); in West-
ern civilization, as in the Chinese civilization, the multiple forms of sovereignty in a feudal society
lead to a monarchical individualization that introduces a rational administration. The forms and the
sequences of events are different in each cycle, but the coinciding of social troubles, the decline of
sacred values, and the enrichment of individual life is constant; the same is true of the recomposition
that follows the crisis.
     5. It goes without saying that it is impossible to determine an exact date on which a process
starts and, on the whole, considerations on the order of those explained here cannot have an ex-
tremely precise formal value. The same is true, moreover, of any reflections on a complex subject.
      6. Thus Spoke Zarathustra, second part, ‘'On the Land of Education.’’ [Trans. W. Kaufmann,
in The Portable Nietzsche (New York: Viking, 1954), p. 233. The quote here has been modified
to conform to the French version that Bataille cites. Tr.] The German term Kinderland, land of
children, corresponding to Vaterland, fatherland, cannot be exactly translated.
     7. The Birth of Tragedy, section 1. [Trans. F. Golffing (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday Anchor
Books, 1956), p. 19. Tr.]
     8. This tragedy,    by Cervantes,   was   staged   in Paris in April and May   1937 by Jean-Louis
Barrault. It is important, from the point of view developed here, that Barrault was carried along by
the meaning of the tragedy’s grandeur. It is even more important that André Masson, through his
decors and paintings, created a magic through which the essential themes of mythic existence re-
gained their brilliance. There is no telling here what was Cervantes’ and what was Masson's in the
representation of the two opposed worlds.
    The subject of Numantia is the merciless war carried out by the Roman general Scipio against
the Numantines in revolt who, besieged and exhausted, kill each other rather than surrender. In the
first part, the soothsayer Marquino makes a dead man come out of a tomb, in order to learn from
him the terrible fate of the city.
    {A translation of this play, entitled The Siege of Numantia and translated by R. Campbell, is in
the collection The Classic Theatre, ed. Eric Bentley, vol. 3 (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday Anchor
Books, 1959). Tr.]
     9. ‘“‘Numantia!    Liberty!’’ is the war cry of the furious and besieged Numantines.
The Obelisk




                      The Mystery of the Death of God
A ‘“‘mystery’’ cannot be posited in the empty region of spirit, where only words
foreign to life subsist. It cannot result from a confusion between obscurity and
the abstract void. The obscurity of a ‘“mystery’’ comes from images that a kind
of lucid dream borrows from the realm of the crowd, sometimes bringing to light
what the guilty conscience has pushed back into the shadows, sometimes high-
lighting figures that are routinely ignored. From Louis XVI’s guillotine to the
obelisk, a spatial arrangement is formed on the PUBLIC SQUARE, in other
words, on all the public squares of the *‘civilized world’’ whose historical charm
and monumental appearance prevail over everything else. For it is nowhere but
THERE that a man, in some ways bewitched, in some ways overtaken by
frenzy, expressly presents himself as ‘‘Nietzsche’s madman’’ and illuminates
with his dream-lantern the mystery of the DEATH OF GOD.


                          The Prophecy of Nietzsche
‘““‘Have you not heard,’’ cried Nietzsche, ‘‘of that madman who lit a lantern in
the bright morning hours, ran to the marketplace, and cried incessantly: ’’I seek
God! I seek God!’ —As many of those who did not believe in God were standing
around just then, he provoked much laughter. Has he got lost? asked one. Did
he lose his way like a child? asked another. Or is he hiding? Is he afraid of us?
Has he gone on a voyage? emigrated? —Thus they yelled and laughed.

                                        213
                                 214   )   THE OBELISK


    The madman jumped into their midst and pierced them with his eyes.
‘Whither is God?’ he cried; ‘I will tell you. We have killed him—you and I. All
of us are his murderers. But how did we do this? How could we drink up the
sea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the entire horizon? What were we
doing when we unchained this earth from its sun? Whither is it moving now?
Whither are we moving? Away from all suns? Are we not plunging continually?
Backward, sideward, forward, in all directions? Is there still any up or down?
Are we not straying as through an infinite nothing? Do we not feel the breath
of empty space? Has it not become colder? Is not night continually closing in
on us? Do we not need to light lanterns in the morning? Do we hear nothing
as yet of the noise of the gravediggers who are burying God? Do we smell
nothing as yet of the divine decomposition? Gods, too, decompose. God 1s dead.
God remains dead. And we have killed him.
   ‘How shall we comfort ourselves, the murderers of all murderers? What was
holiest and mightiest of all that the world has yet owned has bled to death under
our knives: who will wipe this blood off us? What water is there for us to clean
ourselves? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to
invent? Is not the greatness of this deed too great for us? Must we ourselves not
become gods simply to appear worthy of it? THERE HAS NEVER BEEN A
GREATER DEED; AND WHOEVER IS BORN AFTER US—FOR THE
SAKE OF THIS DEED HE WILL BELONG TO A HIGHER HISTORY THAN
ALL HISTORY HITHERTO. """


                        Mystery and the Public Square

While the existence of human beings may have importance within their own
lives and within the limits of their personal destinies, it has none in the eyes of
others. Beyond these limits—where human meaning begins—existence matters
to the extent that they attract and, apart from this attraction, they are less than
shadows, less than specks of dust. And the attraction of an isolated human being
is itself nothing but a shadow, a pitiful fleeting apparition. It is but the tentative
incarnation of WHAT     IS ONLY        HUMAN    LIFE, which has no name and which
the agitation of countless multitudes obscurely demands and constructs, in spite
of appearances to the contrary. Who knows what bitterness and sanctity arc
exhaled in this agitation, which is horror, violence, hatred, sobs, crime, disgust,
laughter, and human love. Each individual is but one of the specks of dust that
gravitate around this bitter existence. The dust so effectively obscures the con-
densation around which it orbits that many clear minds, whose reality, however,
is only a kind of residue formed wherever activity is condensed (and not à
stormy light produced in the shelterless solitude of the individual), imagine
human existence as inaccurately as someone who would judge the reality of à
capital by the appearance of a suburb, who would think that that life must be
                                  THE OBELISK     [J 215

examined in its empty and peripheral forms, rather than in the monuments and
the monumental vistas that are its center.


                                    The Obelisk

Clausewitz writes in On War: ‘‘Like the obelisks that are raised at the points
where the major roads of a country begin, the energetic will of the leader consti-
tutes the center from which everything in military art emanates.’’ The Place de
la Concorde is the space where the death of God must be announced and shouted
precisely because the obelisk 1s its calmest negation. As far as the eye can see,
a moving and empty human dust gravitates around it. But nothing answers so
accurately the apparently disordered aspirations of this crowd as the measured
and tranquil spaces commanded by its geometric simplicity.
    The obelisk is without a doubt the purest image of the head and of the
heavens. The Egyptians saw it as a sign of military power and glory, and just
as they saw the rays of the setting sun in their funeral pyramids, so too they
recognized the brilliance of the morning sun in the angles of their splendid
monoliths: the obelisk was to the armed sovereignty of the pharoah what the
pyramid was to his dried-out corpse. It was the surest and most durable obstacle
to the drifting away of all things. And even today, wherever its rigid image
stands out against the sky, it seems that sovereign permanence is maintained
across the unfortunate vicissitudes of civilizations.
   The   old obelisk of Ramses     II is thus,   at the central   point   from   which   the
avenues radiate, both a simpler and a more important apparition than any other;
is it not worthy of renewed astonishment that, from remote regions of the earth
and from the dawn of the ages, this Egyptian image of the IMPERISHABLE,
this petrified sunbeam, arrives at the center of urban life?


                   The Obelisks Respond to the Pyramids

If one considers the mass of the pyramids and the rudimentary means at the dis-
posal of their builders, it seems evident that no enterprise cost a greater amount
of labor than this one,   which   wanted   to halt the flow of time.
    The Egyptian pharoah was surely the first to give the human individual the
structure and the measureless will to be that set him upright above the surface
of the earth as a kind of luminous and living edifice. When individuals—long
after the era of the great pyramids—have wanted to acquire immortality, they
have had to appropriate the Osirian myths and the funeral rites that formerly had
been the privilege of the sovereign. For it was only to the extent that a consider-
able mass of power had been concentrated in a single head that the human being
raised to the heavens his greed for eternal power, something that had surely
never taken place before the pschent designated the head of the pharoah to the
                               216 L] THE OBELISK


holy terror of a vast populace. But once it did, each time death struck down the
heavy column of strength the world itself was shaken and put in doubt, and
nothing less than the giant edifice of the pyramid was necessary to reestablish
the order of things: the pyramid let the god-king enter the eternity of the sky
next to the solar Râ, and in this way existence regained its unshakable plenitude
in the person of the one it had recognized. The existing pyramids still bear wit-
ness to this calm triumph of an unwavering and hallucinating resolve: they are
not only the most ancient and the vastest monuments man has ever constructed,
but they are still, even today, the most enduring. The great triangles that make
up their sides ‘‘seem to fall from the sky like the rays of the sun when the disk,
veiled by the storm, suddenly pierces through the clouds and lets fall to earth
a ladder of sunlight.”” Thus they assure the presence of the unlimited sky on
earth, a presence that never ceases to contemplate and dominate human agita-
tion, just as the immobile prism reflects every one of the things that surrounds
it. In their imperishable unity, the pyramids—endlessly—continue to crystallize
the mobile succession of the various ages; alongside the Nile, they rise up like
the totality of centuries, taking on the immobility of stone and watching all men
die, one after the other: they transcend the intolerable void that time opens under
men’s feet, for all possible movement is halted in their geometric surfaces: IT
SEEMS THAT THEY MAINTAIN WHAT ESCAPES FROM THE DYING
MAN.


                 The ‘‘Sensation of Time’’ Sought by Glory

A moving perspective, represented by the shadows and traces of the successive
generations of numberless dead, extends from the banks of the Nile to those of
the Seine, from the angles of the pyramids to those of the monolith erected
before the Gabriel palace. The long span that stretches from the Ancient Empire
of Egypt to the bourgeois monarchy of the Orleans—which raised the obelisk
on the Place de la Concorde ‘‘to the applause of the immense crowd’’—was
necessary for man to set the most stable limits on the deleterious movement of
time. The mocking universe was slowly given over to the severe eternity of its
almighty Father, guarantor of profound stability. The slow and obscure move-
ments of history took place here at the heart and not at the periphery of being,
and they represent the long and inexpiable struggle of God against time, the
combat of ‘‘established sovereignty’’ against the destructive and creative mad-
ness of things. Thus history endlessly repeats the immutable stone’s response to
the Heraclitean world of rivers and flames.
    But from the development of this changing perspective over the centuries, a
specific result that dominates even the monstrous accumulation of forms has
come to light: the boundaries raised in opposition to the atrocious ‘‘sensation of
time’’ were tied to this sensation in exactly the same way that all work is tied
                               THE OBELISK    O 217

to a sensation of ‘“need.’’ Whereas ‘‘need’’ and poverty endlessly use up the
results of useful labor, the interminable obstinacy of men eventually managed
to distance from communal existence the ‘‘sensation of time,’’ and the shameful
malaise it introduced. Moderation and platitude slowly took over the world;
more and more accurate clocks replaced the old hourglasses that retained a
funereal meaning. The grim reaper went the way of all other phantoms. The
earth has been so perfectly emptied of everything that made night terrifying that
the worst misfortunes and war itself can no longer alter its comfortable
perception. The result is that human striving is no longer directed at powerful
and majestic limits; it now aspires, on the contrary, to anything that can deliver
it from established tranquillity. Everything indicates that it was impossible for
man to live without the ‘‘sensation of time’’ that opened his world like a
movement of breathtaking speed—but what he lived in the past as fear he can
only live now as pride and glory.
   To this vision, whose consequences must be projected before us, is added the
fact that life ceaselessly gravitates around limits that up to now held back agita-
tion and dread. It would seem that sovereign protection has sometimes been
shaken, sometimes violently toppled, and sometimes ignored—but the horizon
none the less remains bound by these great figures. And when someone is
carried by glory to meet time and its cutting explosion, he comes upon them
again, and it is precisely at that moment that death is revealed. From the very
fact that they had become, for the mass of tranquilized lives, increasingly use-
less, empty, and fragile shadows, the figures stand under the threat of collapse
and thus reveal, far more thoroughly than in the fearful obsessions of the past,
the despairing fall of lives. They are no longer obstacles to the lost obsessive
‘‘sensation of time,’’ but are instead the high places from which the breakneck
speed of the fall is possible: and the high places themselves topple, to ensure
a total revelation. The lands stray from their sun, the horizon is annihilated. And
now, rising before the man who carries within himself the naive uproar of con-
quest of the ‘‘death of God,”’ the very stone that earlier had sought to limit
storms is nothing more than a milestone marking the immensity of an unlimitable
catastrophe. A feeling of explosion and a vertiginous weightlessness surround
an imperious and heavy obelisk.


                        The ‘‘Tragic Time of Greece”’

Starting with the immense masonry of the pyramids, this reversal of signs is not,
however, the result of a uniform and regular course of things. Time has not been
the object of a simple feeling of fear. In the attraction exercised by the majestic
figures that impose its limit, a now solid time is no less fascinating than the ex-
plosive charge packed in a steel shell. And the affinities between happiness and
explosion are so profound that fiery catastrophes have always been at the mercy
                                  218   J   THE   OBELISK


of transports of joy. Combat has always been preferable to tranquillity, a sudden
fall to stability. Thus Greece in its earliest days already revealed the possibilities
of affinity between man and violence.
    It even seems that ancient Greece was engendered by wounds and crime, just
as the strength of Cronus was engendered by the bloody mutilation of his father
Uranus, in other words, of precisely the divine sovereignty of the heavens.
Cronus, the very ‘‘human’’ god of the golden age, was celebrated in saturnalia;
Dionysus, whose coming into the world depended on the murder of his mother
by his father—the criminal Zeus striking down Semele in a blast of lightning—
this tragic Dionysus, broken in joy, started the sudden flight of the bacchantes.
And the least explained of all the ‘‘mysteries,”” TRAGEDY, like a festival given
in honor of horror-spreading time, depicted for gathered men the signs of delir-
ium and death whereby they might recognize their true nature.
    This happy yet somber receptiveness of life was answered by the aggressive
vision of Heraclitus. Nietzsche said that this vision was the equivalent of an
earthquake, robbing the earth of its stability. He described it in images that he
used ten years later to describe the death of God, images of a total yet brilliantly
glorious fall. Thus in the death of God, whose whirlwind tears everything from
the past, we find once again this ‘‘nostalgia for a lost world’’ which so painfully
riveted the eyes of Nietzsche on Greece in the tragic era.
    And which, in the same movement, directed Nietzsche’s rage against
Socrates: what Socrates introduced to a tumultuous humanity was nothing less
than the principle, still weak but bearing with it the quality of immutability,
whose obligatory value would put an end to the levity of combat. What Socrates
introduced was the GOOD: it was GOD, and already the gravity of Christianity,
which dominated the tragedy of the passion of the heavens and reduced ‘“the
death of God’’ to the debasement of men and to sin, and turned TIME into
EVIL.


                            The Obelisk and the Cross

The obelisks of Rome are capped with crosses, which add their metallic fragility
to the pyramidal peaks of these great stone figures.
    The equivocal image of the ‘‘death of God’’ more than any other shatters the
order that had fixed the features of immutable sovereignty. The irritated amuse-
ment that derives from this botched copulation captures the essence of the
malaise that results from the accumulation of successive forms necessary to the
lives of men. Thus are revealed the happy shortcuts of Roman Christianity in
which, without logic, life attempts to reconcile its impossible moods. But at the
same   time   it becomes   clear that the crafty,     baroque   edifice that resulted   was
clevated only to fall. For this occidental world, whose             fevers were first ex-
                                   THE OBELISK       (O 219

hausted and contained in the terrible expiation of saints, only seems to have torn
apart its childhood before God in order to be rid of this father, once it had the
strength. Whereas the development of ancient life little by little allowed the
divine shadow to grow and rejected tragic time, the movement of occidental life
strikes down, one after the other, the risky constructions that the will to endure
never maintained in correct propositions. Thus, going in the opposite direction
on the road traveled by the ancient world, this world, as its riches accumulate
and everything in it decomposes, aspires in its depths to the tragic deliverances
of primitive Greek naiveté. It is true that everything takes place in an almost
empty expanse, in a world which, in its entirety, 1s leveled and depressed by
rational destruction. But in each place where the massive destiny of men 1s
formed, the rhythm of life and death accelerates and attains a speed so great that
it results only in the vertigo of the fall.


                         Hegel against the Immutable Hegel

What makes this movement difficult to represent is the fact that it is accelerated
by increases in the sensation of rest. This is what first became apparent when
the vicissitudes of human life were traced back from an obelisk. In particular,
the rest attained by means of this shadow was necessary for the intellect to
approach time with a light heart.
   This movement was not at first clear or assured. Even Hegel describing the
movement     of Spirit as if it excluded all possible rest made           it end, however,   at
HIMSELF as if he were its necessary conclusion. Thus he gave the movement
of time the centripetal structure that characterizes sovereignty, Being, or God.
Time,   on   the other   hand,   dissolving   each    center   that has    formed,   is fatally
known as centrifugal—since it is known in a being whose center is already there.
The dialectical idea, then, is only a hybrid of time and its opposite, of the death
of God and the position of the immutable. But it nevertheless marks the move-
ment of a thought eager to destroy what refuses to die, eager to break the bonds
of time as much as to break the law through which God obligates. It is manifestly
clear that the liberty of time traverses the heavy Hegelian process, precisely to
the feeble extent that Socratic irony introduced into this world an eternal Being
imposing man.


                                 The Pyramid of Surlei
Nietzsche is to Hegel what a bird breaking its shell is to a bird contentedly ab-
sorbing the substance within. The crucial instant of fracture can only be de-
scribed in Nietzsche’s own words:
   ‘“The intensity of my feelings makes me both tremble and laugh . . . I had
                                 220 U THE OBELISK


cried too much . . . these were not tears of tenderness, but tears of jubila-
tion . . . That day I was walking through the woods, along the lake of Silva-
plana; at a powerful pyramidal rock not far from Surlei I stopped . . . ?*
    Nietzsche’s thought, which resulted in the sudden ecstatic vision of the eter-
nal return, cannot be compared to the feelings habitually linked to what passes
for profound reflection. For the object of the intellect here exceeds the cate-
gories in which it can be represented, to the point where as soon as it is repre-
sented it becomes an object of ecstasy—object of tears, object of laugh-
ter . . . The toxic character of the ‘‘return’’ 1s even of such great importance
that, if for an instant it were set aside, the formal content of the ‘‘return’’ might
appear empty.
    In order to represent the decisive break that took place—freeing life from the
humilities of fear—it is necessary to tie the sundering vision of the ‘‘return’’ to
what Nietzsche experienced when he reflected upon the explosive vision of
Heraclitus, and to what he experienced later in his own vision of the ‘‘death of
God’’: this is necessary in order to perceive the full extent of the bolt of lightning
that never stopped shattering his life while at the same time projecting it into
a burst of violent light. TIME is the object of the vision of Heraclitus. TIME
is unleashed in the ‘‘death’’ of the One whose eternity gave Being an immutable
foundation. And the audacious act that represents the ‘‘return’’ at the summit
of this rending agony only wrests from the dead God his roral strength, in order
to give 1t to the deleterious absurdity of time.
    À ‘‘state of glory’’ is thus deftly linked to the feeling of an endless fall. It
is true that a fall was already a part of human ecstasy, on which it conferred the
intoxication of that which approximates the nature of time—but that fall was the
original fall of man, whereas the fall of the ‘‘return’’ is FINAL.


                                   The Guillotine
‘“The very stone that earlier had sought to limit storms is now nothing more than
a milestone marking the immensity of an unlimitable catastrophe . . . ’’ Near
Surlei, a rock in the form of a pyramid still bears witness to the fall of the
“‘return’’ . . .
    Only protracted futility—attached to servile or useful objects—can today
shelter existence from the feeling of violent absurdity. The great dead shadows
have lost the magical charm that made their protection so effective. And when
an extreme chance wills that they still make up the center of destiny, they protect
only to the extent that there is daily indifference.
   The obelisk of Luxor has, after a hundred years, become the measured navel
of the land of moderation: its precise angles now belong to the essential figurc
that radiates from its base. But the timelessness given to it is due to the absence
of any intelligible affirmation: it endures by virtue of its discreet value. Where
                                THE OBELISK (O 221

monuments that had clearly affirmed principles were razed, the obelisk remains
only so long as the sovereign authority and command it symbolizes do not
become conscious. There was some difficulty in finding an appropriate symbol
for the Place de la Concorde, where the images of royalty and the Revolution
had proven powerless. But it was contrary to the majesty of the site to leave an
empty space, and agreement was reached on a monolith brought back from
Egypt. Seldom has a gesture of this type been more successful; the apparently
meaningless image imposed its calm grandeur and its pacifying power on a loca-
tion that always threatened to recall the worst. Shadows that could still trouble
or weigh upon the conscience were dissipated, and neither God nor time re-
mained: total sovereignty and the guillotine-blade that put an end to it no longer
occupied any place in the minds of men.
    This is the deceitful and vague response of exalted places to the fathomless
multitude of insignificant lives that, for as far as the eye can see, orbit around
them—and the spectacle only changes when the lantern of a madman projects
its absurd light on stone.
    At that moment, the obelisk ceases to belong to the present and empty world,
and it is projected to the ends of time. It rises, immutable—there—dominating
time’s desperate flight. But even while it is blinded by this domination, madness,
which flits about its angles in the manner of an insect fascinated by a lamp,
recognizes only endless time escaping in the noise of successive explosions. And
there is no longer an image before it, but it hears this noise of successive explo-
sions. To the extent that the obelisk is now, with all this dead grandeur, recog-
nized, it no longer facilitates the flight of consciousness; it focuses the attention
on the guillotine.
    The Place de la Concorde is dominated, from the height of the palace balus-
trades, by eight armored and acephalic figures, and under their stone helmets
they are as empty as they were on the day the executioner decapitated the king
before them. After the execution, Marly’s two horses were brought from the
nearby forest and set up at the entrance to the exalted places, before which they
rear without end. The central point of the triangle formed by the two horses and
the obelisk marks the location of the guillotine—an empty space, open to the
rapid flow of traffic.


                                Nietzsche/Theseus

The pure image of the heavens, the purified image of the king, of the chief, of
the head and of his firmness, this pure image of the sky crossed by rays, com-
mands the concord and the assurance of those who do not look at it, and who
are not struck by it; but a mortal torment is the lot of the one before whom its
reality becomes naked.
    The purified head, whose unshakable commands lead men, takes on in these
                                   222 [J THE OBELISK

conditions the value of a derisive and enigmatic figure placed at the entrance to
a labyrinth, where those who naively look are led astray without guidance, over-
come with uneasy torment and glory. It is the ‘‘breath of empty space’’ that one
inhales THERE—there where interpretations based on immediate political
events no longer have any meaning; where the isolated event is no more than
the symbol of a much greater event. For it is the foundation of things that has
fallen into a bottomless void. And what is fearlessly conquered—no longer in
a duel where the death of the hero is risked against that of the monster, in ex-
change for an indifferent duration—is not an isolated creature; it is the very void
and the vertiginous fall, it is TIME. The movement of all life now places the
human being before the alternatives of either this conquest or a disastrous re-
treat. The human being arrives at the threshold: there he must throw himself
headlong into that which has no foundation and no head.

                                           Notes

      1. (The Gay Science, section 125, trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Random House, 1974),
p. 181. Tr.]
     2. [Ecce Homo, section on Thus Spake Zarathustra, trans. W. Kaufmann (New York: Random
House, 1967), p. 295. Tr.]
The Sorcerer’s Apprentice'




                  I. An Absence of Need More Unfortunate
                       Than   the Absence      of Satisfaction

A man carries within himself a large number of needs, which he must satisfy
in order to avoid distress. But misfortune can hit him even when he does not
suffer. An evil fate can rob him of the means of satisfying his needs, but he is
no less affected when he lacks one of his elementary needs. The absence of
virility most often involves neither suffering nor distress; satisfaction is not lack-
ing in the one diminished by this absence—but it is nevertheless feared as a
misfortune.
   Thus there is a first ailment that is not felt by the one it strikes; it is only an
ailment for one who must face the menace of an impending mutilation.
    Consumption, which destroys the bronchial tubes without causing suffering,
is surely one of the most pernicious illnesses. And the same 1s true for every-
thing that causes silent decomposition, when it is inconceivable that one could
be aware of it. The greatest harm that strikes men is perhaps the reduction of
their existence to the state of a servile organ. But no one realizes the despair
involved in becoming a politician, a writer, or a scientist. There is no cure for
the insufficiency that diminishes anyone who refuses to become a whole man,
in order to be nothing more than one of the functions of human society.


                  II. Man Deprived of the Need to Be Man
The harm would not be great if it struck only a certain number of luckless men.
The one who mistakes the glory of his literary works for the accomplishment

                                         223
                       224 [1 THE   SORCERER’S   APPRENTICE


of his destiny could be deluded without human life being led into a general
decline. But nothing exists beyond science, politics, and art—which are held to
live in isolation, every man for himself, like so many servants of a dead man.
    The greatest part of activity is subordinated to the production of useful goods,
no decisive change seeming possible, and man is all too inclined to make his
enslavement by work an insuperable limit. Nevertheless, the absurdity of such
an empty existence still induces the slave to complete his production through a
faithful response to what art, politics, or science demand him to be and to be-
lieve; he finds therein the fulfillment of his human destiny. The ‘‘great men’’
who practice in these fields thus constitute a limit for all others. And no alarming
suffering is tied to this state of half-death—scarcely the awareness of a depres-
sion (agreeable if it coexists with the memory of disappointing tensions).
    It is permissible for man to love nothing, for the universe without cause and
without end that gave him his life did not necessarily grant him an acceptable
destiny. But the man who is scared by human destiny, and who cannot endure
the linkage of greed, crimes, and misery cannot be virile, either. If he turns
away from himself, he doesn’t even have a reason to groan to the point of
exhaustion. He can tolerate his existence only on the condition that he forget
what it really is. Artists, politicians, and scientists have the responsibility of
lying to him; those who dominate existence in this way are almost always those
who know    best how to lie to themselves,   hence those who lie best to others. In
these conditions virility declines as much as the love of human destiny. All
equivocations are welcome when it comes to dismissing the heroic and seductive
image of our fate; in a world where the need to be a man        is missing, there 1s
room only for the unattractive face of the useful man.
   But while this absence of need is the worst thing that can happen, it is experi-
enced as smug bliss. Harm appears only if the persistence of “amor fati” makes
a man a stranger to the present world.


                            III. The Man of Science

The ‘‘man deprived by fear of the need to be a man’’ has placed his greatest
hopes in science. He has renounced the character of totality that his acts had as
long as he wanted to live his destiny. For the act of science must be autonomous
and the scientist excludes all human interests external to the desire for knowl-
cdge. A man who bears the burden of science has exchanged human destiny’s
concern for living with a concern for the discovery of truth. He passes from the
totality to a part, and serving this part demands that the other parts no longer
count. Science is a function that developed only after occupying the place of the
destiny that it was to have served. For it could do nothing as long as it served.
    It is a paradox that a function could only be fulfilled on condition that it
become an end in itself.
                        THE SORCERER'’S APPRENTICE (O        225

   The totality of sciences that man has at his disposal is due to this sort of fraud.
But if it is true that the human domain has increased because of it, it has been
at the cost of a crippled existence.?


                             IV. The    Man   of Fiction

The function attributed to art is more equivocal. It does not always seem that
the writer and artist have been willing to renounce existence, and their abdica-
tion is more difficult to detect than that of the man of science. What art and liter-
ature express does not have the birdbrained appearance of learned laws; their
troubling conceptions, in opposition to methodically represented reality, only
seem to be endowed with a shocking seductiveness. But what is the meaning of
these painted and written phantoms, invoked to make the world in which we
wake a little less unworthy to be haunted by our idle lives? Everything 1s false
in images of fantasy. And everything is false with a lie that knows neither hesita-
tion nor shame. The two essential elements of life thus find themselves rigor-
ously dissociated. The truth pursued by science is true only provided that it be
without meaning, and nothing has meaning unless it be fiction.
   The servants of science have excluded human destiny from the world of truth,
and the servants of art have renounced making a true world out of what an anx-
ious destiny has caused them to bring forth. But for all that it is not easy to
escape the necessity of attaining a real, and not a fictive, life. The servants of
art can accept for their creations the fugitive existence of shadows; nevertheless
they themselves must enter living into the kingdom of truth, money, glory, and
social rank. It is thus impossible for them to have anything other than a lame
life. They often think that they are possessed by what they represent, but that
which has no true existence possesses nothing; they are only truly possessed by
their careers. Romanticism replaces the gods who possess from the outside with
the unfortunate destiny of the poet, but through this he is far from escaping lame-
ness; romanticism has only made misfortune into a new form of career and has
made the lies of those it has not killed even more tiresome.


                   V. Fiction Placed in the Service of Action
Hypocrisy linked to the career and, in a more general way, to the ego of the
artist or writer, commits him to place fictions in the service of some more solid
reality. If it is true that art and literature do not form a self-sufficient world, they
can subordinate themselves to the real world, contribute to the glory of the
Church or the State or, if this world is divided, to the action of religious or polit-
ical propaganda. But, in this case, there is nothing more than ornament or ser-
vice to others. If the institutions one serves were themselves agitated by the con-
tradictory movement of destiny, art would encounter the possibility of serving
                       226 [1 THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE


and expressing profound life; if it is a question of organizations whose interests
are tied to circumstances,   to particular   communities,   art introduces   between
profound life and partisan action a confusion that sometimes shocks even the
partisans.
    Most often, human destiny can be lived only in fiction. But the man of fiction
suffers from not accomplishing on his own the destiny he describes; he suffers
from escaping fiction only through his career. He then tries to make the phantoms
that haunt him enter into the real world. As soon, however, as they belong to the
world that action makes true, as soon as the author ties them to some particular
truth, they lose their privilege of realizing human life to the fullest; they are
nothing more than the boring reflections of a fragmentary world.


                             VI.   The Man    of Action

If the truth that science reveals is stripped of human sense, if the fictions of the
spirit alone respond to the strange will of man, then the accomplishment of this
will demands that these fictions be made true. The one who is possessed by a
need to create only experiences the need to be a man. But he renounces this need
if he renounces creating anything more than fantasies and lies. He only remains
virile by trying to make reality conform to what he thinks: each force in him
demands that the failed world in which he has appeared be submitted to the
caprice of dreams.
    However, this necessity most often appears only in an obscure form. It
appears vain to limit oneself to reflecting reality as in science, and vain to escape
it as in fiction. Action alone proposes to transform the world, in other words,
to make it similar to dreams. ‘“To act’’ resonates in the ear with the blast of the
trumpets of Jericho. No imperative possesses a more basic efficacy and, for
whoever hears it, the necessity to take action is imposed without possible delay
and without condition. But he who demands that action realize the will that
animates him quickly receives strange responses. The neophyte learns that the
will to efficacious action is the one that limits itself to dismal dreams. He
accepts; then he slowly understands that action will leave him only the benefit
of having acted. He believed in transforming the world according to his dream,
but he only transformed his dream on the level of the poorest reality: he can only
stifle in himself the will he carried—in order to be able to ACT.


                 VII. Action Changed by the World, Action
                      Incapable of Changing the World
The first renunciation that action demands of the one who wants to act is that
he reduce his dream to the proportions described by science. The concern for
                        THE   SORCERER’S    APPRENTICE      Q   227


giving human destiny a field other than fiction is scorned by doctrinaire politi-
cians. It cannot be set aside in the practice of the extremist parties that demand
from militants that they wager their lives. But the destiny of a man does not
become real on the sole condition that he enter into combat. This destiny must
still mingle with that of the forces in whose ranks he confronts death. And the
doctrinaire politicians, with this destiny at their disposal, reduce it to equal well-
being for all. The language of action accepts only a formula conforming to the
rational principles that govern science and keep it foreign to human life. No one
thinks that political action can be defined and take shape in the personal form
of legendary heroes. The just distribution of material and cultural goods alone
allays their all-consuming concern with avoiding everything that resembles the
human face and its expressions of avid desire or happy defiance before death.
They have been persuaded that it is hateful to address the struggling multitudes
as one would address a crowd of already dying heroes. Thus they speak the
language of self-interest to those who are, in some ways, already dripping blood
from their own wounds.
   Men   of action follow or serve that which exists.       If their action is a revolt,
they still follow fhat which exists when they get themselves killed in order to
destroy it. Human destiny possesses them, in fact, when they destroy; it escapes
them as soon as they have nothing more than the will to order their faceless
world. Destruction has hardly been achieved, and they find themselves, along
with others who follow, at the mercy of what they have destroyed, which then
starts to reconstruct itself. The dreams that science and reason have reduced to
empty formulae—these amorphous dreams themselves cease to be anything
more than the dust raised by the passage of ACTION. Enslaved, and breaking
everything that is not bent by necessity—which they undergo before others—
men of action blindly abandon themselves to the current that sweeps them away
and that is accelerated by their impotent agitation.


                               VIII.   Dissociated   Life

The life thus broken into three pieces has ceased to be life; it is nothing more
than art, science, or politics. In the region where savage simplicity had made
men dominant, there are now nothing but scientists, politicians, and artists. The
renunciation of life in exchange for a function is the condition consented to by
each of them. A few scientists have artistic or political concerns, and politicians
and artists can also look outside of their fields; they only add up three
infirmities, which together do not make a valid man. A totality of life has little
to do with a collection of abilities and areas of expertise. One can no more cut
it into pieces than one can cut up a living body. Life is the virile unity of the
pieces that go to make it up. In it there is the simplicity of an ax blow.
                        228 0 THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE

                IX. Full Life and the Image of the Loved One

Simple and strong life, which has not yet been destroyed by functional servility,
is possible only to the extent that it has ceased to subordinate itself to some
particular project, such as acting, depicting, or measuring; it depends on the
image of destiny, on the seductive and dangerous myth with which it feels itself
to be in silent solidarity. A human being is dissociated when he devotes himself
to a useful labor, which has no sense by itself; he can only find the plenitude
of total life when seduced. Virility is nothing less than the expression of this
principle: when a man no longer has the force to respond to the image of
desirable nudity, he recognizes the loss of his virile integrity. And just as virility
is tied to the allure of a nude body, full existence is tied to any image that arouses
hope and terror. THE LOVED ONE in this broken-up world has become the
only power that has retained the virtue of returning to the heat of life. If this
world were not ceaselessly traversed by the convulsive movements of beings
who seek each other, if it were not transfigured by the face ‘‘whose absence is
painful,’’ it would still appear as a mockery to those it causes to be born: human
existence would be present there, but only in the form of a memory or of a film
of ‘‘primitive’’ countries. It is necessary to exclude fiction, with a feeling of
irritation. The lost, the tragic, the ‘‘blinding marvel,”’ possessed in one’s
innermost being, can no longer be met anywhere but on a bed. It is true that
satisfied dust and the dissociated concerns of the present world also invade
bedrooms; locked bedrooms nevertheless remain, in the almost unlimited mental
void, so many islands where the images of life reconstitute themselves.


                 X. The Illusory Character of the Loved One
The image of the loved one appears, first of all, with a precarious brilliance.
It illuminates and at the same time frightens the one who follows it with his eyes.
He sets it aside and smiles at his puerile agitation if he holds above all else his
concern for his duties. A man who has become ‘‘serious’’ believes it easy to find
existence anywhere else than in the necessary response to this attraction.
However, even if someone else, less weighty, lets himself be burned by the
seduction that frightens him, he must still recognize the illusory character of
such an image.
    Living, in itself, contradicts this image. Eating, sleeping, and speaking empty
it of meaning. If a man meets a woman and if it becomes evident to him that
she 1s his destiny, then everything that invades him like a silent tragedy is incom-
patible with her necessary comings and goings. The image through which, in an
instant, destiny has become alive thus finds itself projected into a world foreign
to everyday agitation. The woman toward whom a man is drawn, as to his
human destiny, no longer belongs to the space that money controls. Her sweet-
                        THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE         [J 229

ness escapes the real world, through which she moves without allowing herself
to be any more imprisoned than a dream. Misfortune would ravage the spirit of
anyone who lets himself be possessed by the need to reduce her. Her reality 1s
as doubtful as a gleam that vacillates, but which the night makes violent.


                         XI. The True     World    of Lovers

The first doubtful appearance of the lovers who meet again in their night of des-
tiny is not, however, of the same order as the illusions of the theater or books.
For theater and literature cannot by themselves create a world where beings re-
locate each other. The most rending visions represented by art have never
created anything more than a fugitive link between the people they have touched.
If they meet, they must be content to express what they have experienced in
phrases that substitute comparison and analysis for communicable reactions,
whereas lovers commune even in the most profound silence, where each move-
ment, charged with burning passion, has the power to convey ecstasy. It would
be vain to deny that this flaming hearth constitutes a real world, the world where
lovers find themselves, as they once appeared to one another, each of them
having taken on the moving form of the other’s destiny. Thus the stormy move-
ment of love makes true what was only an illusion on the first day.
    The obstacle met by the fragmentary activities oblivious to others—by action
oblivious to the dream—is thus surmounted when two beings in love physically
unite. Shadows pursued to the point of an embrace are no less amazing than the
remote creatures of legends. The sudden apparition of a woman seems to belong
to the unsettled world of dreams—but possession throws the nude and pleasure-
drowned dream figure into the narrowly real world of a bedroom.
    Happy action is the *‘sister of dreams,’’ on the very bed where the secret of
life is revealed to knowledge. And knowledge is the ecstatic discovery of human
destiny, in this guarded space where science—as much as art or practical
action—has lost the possibility of giving a fragmentary meaning to existence.’

                              XII.   Series of Chances

The renunciation of dreams and the practical will of the man of action thus do
not represent the only ways to touch the real world. The world of lovers is no
less true than that of politics. It even absorbs the totality of life, which politics
cannot do. And its characteristics are not those of the fragmentary and empty
world of practical action, but those that belong to human life before it is reduced
to servility: the world of lovers is constructed, like life, out of a series of chances
that give the awaited answer to an avid and powerful will to be.
    What determines the election of the loved one—so that the possibility of
another choice, represented logically, inspires horror—is in fact reducible to a
                           230 [J THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE

series of chances. Simple coincidences arrange the meeting and constitute the
feminine figure of destiny to which a man feels bound, sometimes to the point
of death. The value of this figure is dependent on long-term obsessive exi-
gencies, which are so difficult to satisfy that they lend the loved one the colors
of extreme luck. When a certain configuration of cards is introduced into a
game, it determines the fate of the stakes; the unexpected meeting of a woman,
as in the case of a lucky hand of cards, determines existence. But the best hand
of cards only has meaning if the conditions under which it is dealt allow one to
win the pot. The winning hand is only an arbitrary combination; the desire to
win, and the winnings themselves, make it real. Consequences alone give a true
character to random series that would have no meaning if human caprice had
not chosen them. Meeting a woman would only be an aesthetic emotion without
the will to possess her and make true what her apparition had seemed to mean.
Only   once   conquered,    or lost, the fugitive   image   of destiny   ceases   to be an
aleatory figure and becomes reality determining fate.

    An ‘‘avid and powerful will to be’’ is thus the condition of truth, but the iso-
lated individual never possesses the power to create a world (he only tries it if
he himself is in the power of forces that alienate his senses and thus make him
mad); the coincidence of wills is no less necessary to the birth of human worlds
than is the coincidence of chance figures. Only the accord of lovers, like that
of gamblers at a table, creates the living reality of still shapeless correspon-
dences (if the accord is lacking, sorrow, in which love remains real, is always
the consequence of a first complicity). Moreover, the accord of two, or of
several, must be added to the general belief that assigns a value to the previously
described figures of destiny. The meaning of love is determined in legends that
illustrate the destiny of lovers in everyone’s mind.
    But this ‘‘avid will to be,’’ even in relation to the fact that it is held in
common, is in no way similar to the will that deliberates and intervenes. It is
will as blind fearlessness before death and must, following the example of one
who confronts murderous gunfire, trust itself in large part to chance. Only a
random movement can give the response that obscure passion demands, upon
the fortuitous appearance of ‘‘series.”’ A good game only has value if the cards
are properly shuffled and cut, and not set up in a prior arrangement, which
would constitute cheating. The player’s decisions must themselves be chancy,
due to his ignorance of the other players’ hands. The secret force of loved ones
and the value of their conjunction cannot result from decisions or intentions
determined in advance. It is true that, even beyond prostitution or marriage, the
world of lovers is still more the realm of trickery than is the world of gambling.
There are no precise limits, but instead there are numerous nuances between the
ingenuous meeting of persons incapable of hidden motives, and the impudent
                          THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE           [J 231

flirtation that ceaselessly arranges frauds and maneuvers. But naive uncon-
sciousness alone has the power to conquer the world of miracles where lovers
meet.

   Luck, which struggles with the teleological disposition and with the coordi-
nation of means and ends, thus triumphs, suddenly appearing with divine ardor.
For a long time now the intellect has ceased to imagine the universe in the grasp
of a prescient reason. Existence recognizes that it is at the disposal of chance,
provided that it can see itself on the same scale as the starry sky, or death. It
recognizes itself in its magnificence, made in the image of a universe untouched
by the stain of merit or intention.


                                 XIII. Destiny and Myth
It is impossible   to imagine,     without     soon   succumbing   to extreme   dread,     the
crowd that turns away from this ‘‘horrible’’ influence of chance. This crowd in
fact demands that assured life no longer depend on anything but calculations and
appropriate decisions. But the ‘‘life that only measures itself against death’”
escapes those who lose the taste for burning ‘‘in the flames of hope and dread,”’
a taste shared by lovers and gamblers. Human destiny wants capricious chance
to command;      what   reason   substitutes   for the rich vegetation   of chance       is no
longer an adventure to be lived, but is instead the empty and correct solution
to the difficulties of existence. Acts undertaken with some rational end are only
servile responses to a necessity. Acts undertaken in pursuit of seductive images
of chance are the only ones that respond to the need to live like a flame. For
it 1s human to burn and consume oneself to the point of suicide at the baccarat
table; even if the cards reflect a degraded form of good or bad fortune, their
meaning, which wins or loses money, also possesses the virtue of signifying des-
tiny (the queen of spades sometimes signifies death). It is, on the contrary, in-
human to abandon life to a chain of useful acts. One aspect of human options
is inevitably devoted to a concern with freeing oneself from problems such as
hunger, cold, and social constraints. What escapes servitude—life—risks itself;
in other words, it places itself on the level of the chances it meets.
   Life risks itself, the project of destiny is realized. What was only a dream
figure becomes myth. And living myth, which intellectual dust only knows as
dead and sees as the touching error of ignorance, the myth-lie represents destiny
and becomes being. Not the being that rational philosophy betrays by giving it
the attributes of the immutable, but the being expressed by the given name and
the surname, and then the double being that loses itself in an endless embrace,
and finally the being of the city ‘‘that tortures, decapitates, and makes
            9>
war
  . . .
                        232 ) THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE

    Myth remains at the disposal of one who cannot be satisfied by art, science,
or politics. Even though love by itself constitutes a world, it leaves intact every-
thing that surrounds it. The experience of love even augments lucidity and suf-
fering; it develops the malaise and the exhausting impression of emptiness that
results from contact with decomposed society. Myth alone returns, to the one
who is broken by every ordeal, the image of a plenitude extended to the com-
munity where men gather. Myth alone enters the bodies of those it binds and
it expects from them the same receptiveness. It is the frenzy of every dance; it
takes existence ‘‘to its boiling point’’: it communicates to it the tragic emotion
that makes its sacred intimacy accessible. For myth is not only the divine figure
of destiny and the world where this figure moves; it cannot be separated from
the community to which it belongs and which ritually assumes its dominion. It
would be fiction if the accord that a people manifests in the agitation of festivals
did not make it a vital human reality. Myth is perhaps fable, but this fable is
placed in opposition to fiction if one looks at the people who dance it, who act
it, and for whom it is living truth. A community that does not carry out the ritual
possession of its myths possesses only a truth in decline; it is living to the extent
that its will to be animates the sum of mythical chances that represent its intimate
existence. A myth thus cannot be assimilated to the scattered fragments of a dis-
sociated group. It is in solidarity with total existence, of which it 1s the tangible
expression.
    Ritually lived myth reveals nothing less than true being; in it life appears no
less terrible or beautiful than the loved woman, nude on a bed. The darkness of
the sacred place, which contains the real presence, is no more oppressive than
that of the bedroom where lovers have locked themselves; the knowledge to be
gleaned is no less foreign to the science of laboratories in the sacred place than
it is in the lovers’ hideaway. In the sacred place, human existence meets the
figure of destiny fixed by the caprice of chance: the determining laws that
science defines are the opposite of this play of fantasy constituting life. This play
separates itself from science and coincides with the delirium that engenders the
images of art. But while art recognizes the ultimate reality and the superior
character of the true world that constrains men, myth enters into human exis-
tence like a force demanding that inferior reality submit to its dominion.


                        XIV. The Sorcerer’s Apprentice
It is true that this return to the old human house is perhaps the most upsetting
moment of a life devoted to the succession of disappointing illusions. As a
strange step draws nearer to it, the old house of myth appears no less deserted
than the *‘picturesque’’ rubble of temples. For the representation of the myth
that expresses the totality of existence is not the result of any current experience.
The past alone, or the civilizations of ‘“backward’’ peoples, have made possible
                            THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE                 [J 233

the knowledge but not the possession of a world that seems henceforth inacces-
sible. It is possible that total existence is nothing more for us than a simple
dream, nourished by historical descriptions and by the secret gleams of our pas-
sions. Contemporary men can master only a heap that represents the debris of
existence. This recognized truth, however, quickly appears at the mercy of the
lucidity controlled by the need to live. At the very least a first experience should
be followed by failure before the denier acquires the right to sleep guaranteed
by his denial. The methodical description of the experience to be attempted
indicates, moreover, that it only demands attainable conditions. The ‘‘sorcerer’s
apprentice,’’ first of all, does not encounter demands that are any different from
those he would encounter on the difficult road of art. Inconsequential fictional
figures are no less exclusive of determined intention than are arid mythical
figures. The requirements of mythological invention are only more rigorous.
They do not refer—as a rudimentary conception would have it—to obscure
faculties of collective invention. But they would refuse to see any value in
figures whose share of willed arrangement has not been set apart with the rigor
proper to sacred feeling. From beginning to end, moreover, the “sorcerer’s
apprentice’” must accustom himself to this rigor (supposing that it does not
respond to his most intimate command). Secrecy, in the domain where he ad-
vances, is no less necessary to his strange procedures than it is to the transports
of eroticism (the total world of myth, the world of being, is separated from the
dissociated world by the very limits that separate the sacred from the profane).
The ‘‘secret society’’ is precisely the name of the social reality constituted by
these procedures. But this novelistic expression must not be understood, as it
usually is, in the vulgar sense of a ‘‘spy ring.’’ For secrecy has to do with the
constitutive reality of seductive existence, and not with some action contrary to
the security of the State. Myth is born in ritual acts hidden from the static vul-
garity of disintegrated society, but the violent dynamism that belongs to it has
no other object than the return to lost totality; even if it is true that the repercus-
sions are decisive and transform the world (whereas the action of parties is lost
in the quicksand of contradictory words), its political repercussion can only be
the result of existence. The obscurity of such projects only expresses the dis-
concerting reorientation necessary at the paradoxical moment of despair.

                                                  Notes

     1. This text does not exactly constitute a sociological study, but the definition of a point of view
through which the results of sociology can appear as responses to the most virile concerns, and not
to a specialized scientific preoccupation. Sociology itself, in fact, has difficulty avoiding a critique
of pure science to the extent that it is a phenomenon of dissociation. If the social fact represents by
itself the totality of existence, and if science is only a fragmentary activity, then the science that en-
visages the social fact cannot attain its object if that object, to the extent that it is attained, becomes
the negation of science’s principles. Sociological science thus no doubt demands other conditions
than the disciplines that are concerned with the dissociated aspects of nature. It seems to have devel-
                             234 [) THE SORCERER’S APPRENTICE

oped—in particular in France—insofar as those who have taken it on have been aware of the coincid-
ing of the social fact and the religious fact. The results of French sociology run the risk, however,
of remaining nonexistent if the question of totality is not first posed in all its magnitude.
      2. It does not follow that science must be rejected . . . Its moral ravages are alone criticized,
but it is not impossible to contravene them, as far as sociology is concerned, in the name of the prin-
ciple of knowledge (see above, note 1).
     3. The description of the ‘‘world of lovers’’ in this text has, however, only a demonstrative
value. This world constitutes one of the rare possibilities for present life, and its realization presents
a character that is much less distanced from the totality of existence than are the worlds of art, poli-
tics, or science. It however does not fulfill human life. It would in any case be an error to consider
it the elementary form of society. The conception that holds that the couple is at the basis of human
society had to be abandoned for reasons that seem decisive.
The Practice of Joy before Death




       All this I am, and I want to be: at the same time dove, serpent,
       and pig.


                                                                   Nietzsche


When a man finds himself situated in such a way that the world is happily re-
flected in him, without entailing any destruction or suffering—as on a beautiful
spring morning—he can let himself be carried away by the resulting enchant-
ment or simple joy. But he can also perceive, at the same time, the weight and
the vain yearning for empty rest implied by this beatitude. At that moment,
something cruelly rises up in him that is comparable to a bird of prey that tears
open the throat of a smaller bird in an apparently peaceful and clear blue sky.
He recognizes that he cannot fulfill his life without surrendering to an inexorable
movement, whose violence he can feel acting on the most remote areas of his
being with a rigor that frightens him. If he turns to other beings who do not go
beyond beatitude, he experiences no hate, but, on the contrary, he sympathizes
with necessary pleasures; he clashes only with those who pretend to attain fulfill-
ment   in their lives, who act out a risk-free charade   in order to be recognized
as having attained fulfillment, while in fact they only speak of fulfillment. But
he should not succumb to vertigo. For vertigo swiftly exhausts and threatens to
revive a concern for happy leisure or, if that cannot be attained, for a painless
emptiness. Or if he does not give in, and if he tears himself completely apart

                                        235
                   236 ) THE PRACTICE OF JOY BEFORE DEATH


in terrified haste, he enters death in such a way that nothing is more horrible.
He alone is happy who, having experienced vertigo to the point of trembling in
his bones, to the point of being incapable of measuring the extent of his fall, sud-
denly finds the unhoped-for strength to turn his agony into a joy capable of freez-
ing and transfiguring those who meet it. But the only ambition that can take hold
of a man who, in cold blood, sees his life fulfilled in rending agony, cannot
aspire to a grandeur that only extreme chance has at its disposal. This kind of
violent decision, which disrupts his repose, does not necessarily entail either his
vertigo or his fall in sudden death. In him, this decision may become an act and
a power by which he devotes himself to the rigor whose movement ceaselessly
closes in on him, as cutting as the beak of a bird of prey. Contemplation is only
the context, sometimes calm and sometimes stormy, in which the rapid force of
his action must one day be put to the test. The mystical existence of the one
whose ‘‘joy before death’’ has become inner violence can never attain the satis-
fying beatitude of the Christian who gives himself a foretaste of eternity. The
mystic of ‘‘joy before death’’ can never be seen as cornered, for he is able to
laugh complacently at every human endeavor and to know every accessible
enthusiasm: but the totality of life—ecstatic contemplation and lucid knowledge
accomplished in a single action that cannot fail to become risk—is, however,
just as inexorably his lot as death is that of the condemned man.

    The texts that follow cannot alone constitute an initiation into the exercise of
a mysticism of ‘‘joy before death.’’ While admitting that a method of initiation
might exist, they do not represent even a part of it. Since oral initiation 1s itself
difficult, it is impossible to give in a few pages more than the vaguest representa-
tion of that which by nature cannot be grasped. On the whole, these writings
represent, moreover, less exercises strictly speaking than simple descriptions of
a contemplative state or of an ecstatic contemplation. These descriptions would
not even be acceptable 1f they were not given for what they are, in other words,
as free. Only the very first text could be proposed as an exercise.

   While it is appropriate to use the word mysticism when speaking of ‘‘joy
before death’’ and its practice, this implies no more than an affective resem-
blance between this practice and those of the religions of Asia or Europe. There
is no reason to link any presuppositions concerning an alleged deeper reality
with a joy that has no object other than immediate life. ‘‘Joy before death’
belongs only to the person for whom there 1s no beyond; it is the only intellec-
tually honest route in the search for ecstasy.
    Besides, how could a beyond, a God or what resembles God, still be accept-
able? No words are clear enough to express the happy disdain of the one who
‘“dances with the time that kills him’’ for those who take refuge in the expecta-
tion of eternal beatitude. This kind of fretful saintliness—which first had to be
                   THE PRACTICE OF JOY BEFORE DEATH           O 237

sheltered from erotic excess—has now lost all its power: one can only laugh at
a sacred drunkenness allied with a horror of debauchery. Prudery may be
healthy for backward souls, but those who would be afraid of nude girls or
whisky would have little to do with ‘‘joy before death.”’

    Only a shameless, indecent saintliness can lead to a sufficiently happy loss
of self. ‘‘Joy before death’’ means that life can be glorified from root to summit.
It robs of meaning everything that is an intellectual or moral beyond, substance,
God, immutable order, or salvation. It is an apotheosis of that which is perish-
able, apotheosis of flesh and alcohol as well as of the trances of mysticism. The
religious forms it rediscovers are the naive forms that antedate the intrusion of
a servile morality: it renews the kind of tragic jubilation that man ‘‘is’’ as soon
as he stops behaving like a cripple, glorifying necessary work and letting himself
be emasculated by the fear of tomorrow.


                                          I
   “‘I abandon myself to peace, to the point of annihilation.’’

   ‘“The noises of struggle are lost in death, as rivers are lost in the sea, as stars
burst in the night.
    The strength of combat is fulfilled in the silence of all action.
    I enter into peace as I enter into a dark unknown.
    I fall in this dark unknown.
    I myself become this dark unknown.”


                                          II
   “I AM joy before death.
   Joy before death carries me.
   Joy before death hurls me down.
   Joy before death annihilates me.”’

    *‘I remain in this annihilation and, from there, I picture nature as a play of
forces expressed in multiplied and incessant agony.”’

   “I slowly lose myself in unintelligible and bottomless space.
   I reach the depths of worlds.
   [ am devoured by death.
   I am devoured by fever.
   I am absorbed in somber space.
   I am annihilated in joy before death.’”
                   238   [   THE   PRACTICE    OF JOY   BEFORE   DEATH


                                              IIl

““I AM joy before death.’’

   ‘““The depth of the sky, lost space is joy before death:              everything is pro-
foundly cracked.”

    ‘I imagine the earth turning vertiginously in the sky.
    I imagine the sky itself slipping, turning, and lost.
    The sun, comparable to alcohol, turning and bursting breathlessly.
    The depth of the sky like an orgy of frozen light, lost.
    Everything that exists destroying itself, consuming itself and dying, each
instant producing itself only in the annihilation of the preceding one, and itself
existing only as mortally wounded.
    Ceaselessly destroying and consuming myself in myself in a great festival of
blood.
    ! imagine the frozen instant of my own death.””"


                                              IV

‘“I focus on a point before me and I imagine this point as the geometric locus
of all existence and all unity, of all separation and all dread, of all unsatisfied
desire and all possible death.’’

   ‘“[ adhere to this point and a profound love of what I find there burns me,
until I refuse to be alive for any reason other than for what 1s there, for this point
which, being both the life and death of the loved one, has the blast of a
cataract.’’

    ‘“And at the same time it is necessary to strip away all external representa-
tions from what is there, until it is nothing but a pure violence, an interiority,
a pure inner fall into a limitless abyss; this point endlessly absorbing from the
cataract all its inner nothingness, in other words, all that has disappeared, 1s
‘past,’ and in the same movement endlessly prostituting a sudden apparition to
the love that vainly wants to grasp that which will cease to be.’’

    ‘“The impossibility of satisfaction in love 1s a guide toward the fulfilling leap
at the same time that it is the nullification of all possible illusion.’’


                                               V
‘“If l imagine myself in a vision and in a halo that transfigures the ecstatic and
exhausted face of a dying being, what radiates from that face illuminates with
                      THE PRACTICE OF JOY BEFORE DEATH                U 239


its necessity the clouds in the sky, whose grey glow then becomes more penetrat-
ing than the light of the sun itself. In this vision, death appears to be of the same
nature as the illuminating light, to the extent that light is lost once it leaves its
source: it appears that no less a loss than death is needed for the brilliance of
life to traverse and transfigure dull existence, for it is only its free uprooting that
becomes in me the strength of life and time. In this way I cease to be anything
other than the mirror of death, just as the universe is only the mirror of light.”’


                               VI. Heraclitean       Meditation

“I MYSELF        AM    WAR.”

    ‘“[ imagine human movement and excitation, whose possibilittes are limit-
less: this movement and excitation can only be appeased by war.
    [ imagine the gift of an infinite suffering, of blood and open bodies, in the
image of an ejaculation cutting down the one it jolts and abandoning him to an
exhaustion charged with nausea.
    I imagine the earth projected in space, like a woman screaming, her head in
flames.
    Before the terrestrial world whose summer and winter order the agony of all
living things, before the universe composed of innumerable turning stars,
limitlessly losing and consuming themselves, I can only perceive a succession
of cruel splendors whose very movement requires that I die: this death is only
the exploding consumption of all that was, the joy of existence of all that comes
into the world; even my own life demands that everything that exists, every-
where, ceaselessly give itself and be annihilated.
    I imagine myself covered with blood, broken but transfigured and in agree-
ment with the world, both as prey and as a jaw of TIME, which ceaselessly kills
and 1s ceaselessly killed.
    There are explosives everywhere that perhaps will soon blind me. I laugh
when I think that my eyes persist in demanding objects that do not destroy
them.”’

                                              Note

      1. One night, dreaming, X. is struck by lightning; he understands that he is dying and he is
suddenly, miraculously, dazzled and transformed; at this point in his dream, he attains the unex-
pected, but he wakes up.
The Sacred




The moment has probably come to designate the crucial element toward which
an obscure and uncertain search was directed, through the detours of the creation
of forms or verbal invention. The great ‘“quest’’ of what has been given the poor
name ‘‘modern spirit’’ was certainly not obsessed with a ‘‘grail’’ as easily acces-
sible as the ‘‘beautiful’’; it distanced itself with distrust, sometimes even with
an ostentatious distrust, from all the paths leading to the ‘“true,’’ and seemed
to have only equivocal feelings about ‘‘the good,”’ going from profound
modesty to insulting rage, from affirmation to an equally trenchant negation.
The conditions for the search were, moreover, obscurity and the limitless char-
acter of the goal that it had resolved to attain. Long torment and abrupt violence
alone bore witness to the fundamental importance for all life of this ‘“quest’’ and
its indeterminable object.
     First of all, it 1s necessary to show that there are no examples of such a move-
ment of passion raging within the narrow domain of artistic invention. Even
romanticism seems to have been traversed by a strictly intellectual uneasiness,
if it is compared with the agitation of the ‘‘modern spirit.’’ In the order of formal
invention, the romantics did not create. They permitted themselves some
license, and did nothing but extend the domain of myths and, in general, given
poetic themes, which for them, just as before them, served as motifs for verbal
creation. Today’s restlessness has not had an intellectual development compa-
rable to that of romanticism and the German philosophy dependent on it, but this
restlessness has been applied, with a sort of vertigo, to the discovery of verbal
or figurative formulae that are the key to this ponderous existence, which so

                                         240
                                THE SACRED     L 241

often defies investment with a raison d’étre. Surrealism today has made itself
the supporter of this enterprise, but it recognizes itself as the heir to an earlier
obsession: the history of poetry since Rimbaud, that of painting since Van Gogh,
testify to the extent and the meaning of the new upheaval.

    If one now wants to represent, with an initial clarity, the ‘‘grail’’ obstinately
pursued through successive, deceptive, and cloudy depths, it is necessary to
insist upon the fact that it could never have been a substantial reality; on the
contrary, it was an element characterized by the impossibility of its enduring.
The term privileged instant' is the only one that, with a certain amount of
accuracy, accounts for what can be encountered at random in the search; the
opposite of a substance that withstands the test of time, it is something that flees
as soon as it is seen and cannot be grasped. The will to fix such instants, which
belong, it is true, to painting or writing is only the way to make them reappear,
because the painting or the poetic text evokes but does not make substantial what
once appeared. This gives rise to a mixture of unhappiness and exultation, of
disgust and insolence; nothing seems more miserable and more dead than the
stabilized thing, nothing is more desirable than what will soon disappear. But,
as he feels what he loves escaping, the painter or writer trembles from the cold
of extreme want; vain efforts are expended to create pathways permitting the
endless reattainment of that which flees.

    It is decisively important in this movement that the search, intellectually
undertaken at the promptings of unsatisfied desire, has always preceded theory’s
delineation of the object sought. The belated intervention of discriminating
intelligence certainly opened up a field of possibilities for empty error, whose
extent became discouraging, but it is no less certain that an experience of this
nature would not have been possible if some clairvoyant theory had tried to fix
in advance its direction and its limits. It is only when things are already settled
and night has fallen that the ‘‘Owl of Minerva’’ can give the goddess an account
of the events that have taken place and can decide upon their hidden meaning.

     It appears after the fact that art, no longer capable of expressing whatever
it is that, coming to it from outside, is incontestably sacred—romanticism having
used up the possibilities of renewal—it appears after the fact that art could no
longer live if it did not have the force to attain the sacred instant by its own
resources. The techniques put into play up to that point only had to express a
given that had its own value and meaning. They added to this given only the
achieved perfection of expression, to which the ‘‘beautiful’’ could be restored;
in relation to them the ‘‘true’’ was only the crudest way of deciding whether the
perfection of means sought had been attained, and the ‘‘good’’ remained foreign
to them, since its judgments can have no bearing on whatever is expressed. The
                                242 0 THE SACRED

results were relative facility, absence of worry, and innocence; profound bitter-
ness was excluded from this execution of plans, for which society, its traditions,
and its powers took both the initiative and the responsibility. This bitterness was
experienced only when doubt was cast on the value of these plans; the authority
denied to present reality was then transferred onto the deceptive specters of the
past and the elusive phantoms of dreams. Up to the moment, that is, when art,
which was still fundamentally only a means of expression, became aware of the
created share that it had always added to the world it expressed; at that moment
it could turn away from all past or present reality and create from itself its own
reality, which can no longer be simply beautiful or true, and which must
dominate the struggle of good against evil—because of the supreme value this
reality represents—in the same way that a violent earth tremor dominates and
paralyzes the most catastrophic of battles.

   Certainly the possibility of now assigning a definable object to such a strange
endeavor is more the result of the endeavor’s failure than it is of any moments
of fugitive success. À foolish bitterness and an arrogant aversion to oneself have
been its most accomplished results. Such results—Rimbaud’s name alone sums
up their capacity to make nearly everything despicable—underscore the extent
to which the cycle of possible exchanges between connoisseurs, painters, and
poets moves away from the ‘‘grail’’ without which—and this has become all the
more clearly and distinctly apparent, by the very fact of this failure—human
existence cannot be justified.

    As long as the identification introduced by Christianity between God and the
object of religion was imposed upon the spirit, all that could be recognized on
the subject of this ‘‘grail’’ was that it could not be confused with God. This
distinction had the drawback of setting aside the still profound identity between
this ‘“grail’’ and the very object of religion. But the development of knowledge
touching on the history of religions has shown that the essential religious activity
was not directed toward a personal and transcendent being (or beings), but
toward an impersonal reality. Christianity has made the sacred substantial, but
the nature of the sacred, in which today we recognize the burning existence of
religion, is perhaps the most ungraspable thing that has been produced between
men: the sacred is only a privileged moment of communal unity, a moment of
the convulsive communication of what is ordinarily stifled.
    Such a disjunction between the sacred and transcendental substance (conse-
quently impossible to create) suddenly opens a new field—a field perhaps of
violence, perhaps of death, but a field which may be entered—to the agitation
that has taken hold of the living human spirit. For if the field of the sacred 1s
accessible, there can be no question of this spirit not breaking through the
barrier; this spirit must simply recognize, since it sought and seeks without
Figure 13. Sacred site in Lithuania. The crosses planted by the peasants only
perpetuate the meaning of a pagan tumulus where sacrifices were carried out.




                                        Figure 14. The Torero Villalta before the bull he
                                        has just killed. Modem bullfights, owing to their
                                         ritual enactment and their tragic character, repre­
                                         sent a form close to ancient sacred games.
Figure 15. The Phallus o f Delos. Choregic monu­
ment of Karystios, ca. 300 B. C. The words in
various languages that designate the sacred signify
both “ pure” and “ filthy.” The meaning o f the
sacred can be seen as lost to the extent that the
awareness of the secret horrors at the basis o f reli­
gions is lost.




Figure 16. Sacrifice through the
tearing out of the heart, in Aztec
Mexico. Post-Hispanic Mexican
manuscript, Codex Vaticanus
3738. Human sacrifice is loftier
than any other—not in the sense
that it is cruder than any other,
but because it is close to the only
sacrifice without trickery, which
can only be the ecstatic loss of
oneself.
                                       THE SACRED       L] 245

respite, that it never sought, and does not seek, to reach less far. The fact that
““God is recognized to be dead’’ cannot lead to a less decisive consequence; God
represented the only obstacle to the human wiil, and freed from God this will
surrenders, nude, to the passion of giving the world an intoxicating meaning.
Whoever creates, whoever paints or writes, can no longer concede any
limitations on painting or writing; alone, he suddenly has at his disposal all
possible human convulsions, and he cannot flee from this heritage of divine
power—which belongs to him. Nor can he try to know if this heritage will
consume and destroy the one it consecrates. But he refuses now to surrender
‘“what possesses him’’ to the standards of salesmen, to which art has conformed.

                                                Note

     1. Emile Dermenghem has used the expression ‘“privileged instants’’—which for him are at the
basis of poetry and mysticism—in an article in Mesures (July 1938): ‘“The Instant in the Works of
the Mystics and Some Poets.’’ This article refers in particular to the conceptions of the Sufis, who
attribute to the ‘‘instant’’ a decisive value, and who compare it to a slicing sword.   ‘“The instant,’’
a Sufi says, ‘‘cuts the roots of the future and the past. The sword is a dangerous companion; it can
make its master a king but it can also destroy him. It does not distinguish between the neck of its
master and the neck of another.”” The profoundly ambiguous, dangerous, and mortal character of
the sacred is reflected in this violent representation.—Jean-Paul Sartre in Nausea has already spoken
of ‘‘perfect moments’’   and ‘‘privileged situations’’ in a significant way.
The College of Sociology




[July 4, 1939] This meeting was to have been devoted to the College of Sociol-
ogy itself. Because the College of Sociology is, up to a certain point, a singular
enterprise, difficult to reduce to the usual forms of activity, there was cause to
clarify its meanings and intentions, especially since this singular character may
have disconcerted those who have watched us debate, and given rise to doubts
in their minds. To tell the truth, the circumstances are such that there exists,
between those who up to this point had tried to see things through to a successful
conclusion, such strained relations that I should speak of a crisis rather than of
the common development of an organization. The talk I am starting now will
thus only be the expression of a profound disagreement that has already opened
a crack in the wall. It had been understood that three of us would speak tonight,
Caillois, Leiris, and I—but I am alone. I do not recognize this without sadness.
Caillois left for Argentina a few days ago, and his absence was evidently inevit-
able; it was no less meaningful. The few texts that I have received from him
since his departure are in any case of a nature that would suspend the accord
that existed between us. I will not put these things forward today, for it seems
possible to me that an oral explanation—Caillois will return in September—will
resolve the differences that they establish between us. For the moment I would
rather speak of the substance of a disagreement than of terms that may only give
rise to misinterpretations. It is possible that by elevating the debate, moreover,
and displacing it to the point where love and death alone are still in question,
I do nothing more than set aside any chance of ultimate reconciliation. Even
though that appears to be the case, I retain the conviction that at this moment

                                        246
                       THE COLLEGE OF SOCIOLOGY         U 247

I am acting in the opposite way, but if I was aware that in doing it I was smash-
ing the possibilities that remain, I would still do it, and in the same way, because
other things count more than the College of Sociology. If I have come here this
evening, if I have come here for two years, it is in fact less with the concern
for founding an influential organization than with the will to create a force, start-
ing from an awareness of the misery and the grandeur of this perishable exis-
tence that has befallen us; STANDING        AND     FACING      DESTINY    remains   in
my eyes the essential aspect of knowledge. Having perceived that the results put
forward by the science of the sacred take away from man his ability to hide from
what he is, it seemed to me opportune to found an association that would have
this science in particular as its object. No one is more avid than I to find the
virtues of association, no one is more frightened than I of the deception that
founds individual isolation, but the love of human destiny exists in me with
enough force to relegate to the background the concern for the forms through
which it can enter.
    It seems to me that the interest aroused by the College of Sociology—both
within and without—depended on its effectiveness in putting everything in ques-
tion. The intentions of various people were perhaps different, and I have not
wanted, in speaking of my reasons, to make it appear that they were not exclu-
sively mine.   It goes without   saying, however,   that only long-range    intentions
and the capacity that we had for defining crucial new problems justified our exis-
tence. To the extent that the College of Sociology 1s not an open door on the
chaos in which every form moves, arises, and perishes, on the convulsion of
festivals, of human powers and deaths, it in truth represents only the void. This
is why I suffer when I see Leiris, who refrains from speaking today due to
doubts on the soundness of our activity—I suffer to see Leiris reproach us for
not further resembling the scientists we claim as our authorities. Leiris thinks
that we do not follow the rules of Durkheim’s sociological method, and that the
role we assign the sacred does not conform to the doctrine of the total phenom-
enon of Mauss. He adds to these considerations the fear of seeing our efforts
lead to the formation of the worst of literary cliques. I said I would raise the
level of the discussion resulting from the crisis I have spoken of. I will raise it
as high as I can. I think that Caillois’s work, or my work, will be criticized,
but that it will command respect. That, however, is not the question. Above all,
the question is whether it is still possible to discuss fundamental problems, if one
agrees to go as far as one can in the possible questioning of matters of life, to
demand everything of which our remaining strength is capable. Methodological
and doctrinal points, the inevitable obstacles, the inevitable chances of failure,
all this is certainly important, but one can also look beyond these necessary
difficulties.
    That a beyond—by this I mean a terrestrial beyond—belongs to present-day
man is a truth that is difficult to contest. It is no less contestable that access to
                        248 (O THE COLLEGE OF SOCIOLOGY

this beyond must appear, first of all, in the form of combat and danger. And
no one doubts that the internal dangers, that the inner dangers of all movements
must be formidable, and even more, demoralizing.
    The disagreement emphasized by Leiris does not exclude, moreover, the
possibility of a subsequent collaboration, once limits and ends have been well
defined, and above all once the modes of freedom necessary for the development
of an effort—which is still somewhat unsure of itself—have been made clear.
The questions posed by the differences arising between Caillois and myself are
more serious, at least to the extent that they have more to do with the foundations
than with the forms of an activity. But since, as I say, they have to do with the
very foundations of the enterprise, you will permit me to speak about them
through a digression, and, straying from this specific discussion, to limit
myself to speaking about the profound reality that this discussion calls into
question. The very absence of Caillois moreover seems to make any other
procedure impossible. At the outset it suffices to indicate that my emphasis on
mysticism, drama, madness, and death seems to Caillois difficult to reconcile
with the principles from which we start. I must add that Caillois is not the only
one to feel uneasy about this incompatibility. Paulhan and Wahl have conveyed
to me the same impression. Thus I have every reason to introduce today, as
one of the expressions of a state of crisis, an effort at elucidation. I will there-
fore try to show how the development of the College of Sociology caried
within itself the necessity of the present crisis, only too happy to have gone
to the bases of my thought, not in the calm of solitary reflection, but in the
disorder of dispute.
    I thus find myself led to develop a general representation of the things that
will fall within the order of philosophical representations. And only when I have
completed this representation will it be possible for me to show how communal
unity, namely power, is formed, as well as this kind of mental turmoil that goes
from mysticism to madness. I would not, however, want people to become
uneasy, seeing me enter into the dense underbrush of philosophical reflection.
Although I must tackle the central problem of metaphysics, it seems to me that
I can still be clear; in any case I am sure that I will speak of what touches all
human   beings, to the extent that they are enemies of torpor.


    One of the most widely accepted results of man’s efforts to discover what he
really is is without a doubt that he lacks unity of being. Men in the past repre-
xented themselves as an indivisible reality. Some animals can be cut into two
sections; after a certain length of time these two sections form two complete
animals, distinct from each other. But nothing could be more shocking to those
who limit themselves to a classical conception of the human soul than conducting
such an experiment on man. Habits of thought are so well established that it
remains difficult for each of us to see himself doubled, one side seeing, loving,
                       THE COLLEGE OF SOCIOLOGY        E 249

or fleeing the other. It is true that surgery, operating on man or very similar
animals, remains far from such brutal possibilities. It can only carry out mix-
tures that leave the essential intact. At most in the distant future we might see
really troubling possibilities, such as the exchange of the cerebral hemispheres
oftwo big apes . . . I speak of this less out of interest in a possible experiment
than to introduce, into the usual perspectives, a maximum of disorder. I imagine
that the idea of a composite being, resulting from the coupling of two of our
brains, will provoke a kind of vertiginous malaise. This idea can, however,
become familiar. It is nothing more than a banality to consider a human being
as a whole ‘‘ajar,’’ consisting of distant, badly connected, and even unknown
parts. It has generally been recognized that the individual 1s only an unfinished
aggregate; an animal and a human being are seen simply as narrow and stable
compositions, whereas a society is only united by connections that are very loose
and easily done away with. One has to admit at the same time that an individual
or a society are not exceptions, and that each element in nature is an aggregate
of parts, at least as long as we do not reach the simplest stage, that of the
electron. Science enumerates atoms—in spite of their name—as groupings of
elementary particles, molecules as groupings of atoms, and going from stage to
stage it arrives at the individual—a grouping of cells—and finally at society
(where, it is true, it hesitates to recognize—but it is unclear for what reason—a
simple case of unified composition on the basis of multiple elements).
    I do not want to insist upon what is only a scientific introduction to what I
will present today. I am in a hurry, and my haste in arriving at images that are
less external to the reality that we are is perhaps understandable. I will now
speak directly of what each of us can experience, and I will speak first of all
about an aspect of our lives that apparently is as separate as possible from our
union with the social group—I will speak about the erotic activity that the
majority of us enter into with one or with, successively, a number of our fellow
beings. This digression has the advantage of putting us in the presence of
realities that are not only the most obscure, but also the most familiar. In fact
nothing is more vivid in our minds than the image of the union of two beings
of the opposite sex. But as common and as convincing as it is, its meaning
nevertheless remains hidden; all that one can say is that each being blindly obeys
its instinct. Giving a name to this instinct, or seeing it as an expression of the
will to reproduce that belongs to nature, is not a way of escaping this darkness.
In fact other needs than the need to reproduce are satisfied in the act of coupling.
    The introduction of a sociological point of view throws an unforeseen light
on this natural darkness.
    If I consider the reproduction of a simple asexual cell, the birth of a new cell
seems to result from an inability, on the part of the whole, to maintain its integ-
rity: a split, a wound is produced. The growth of the minuscule being has as
its effect an excess, a laceration, a loss of substance. The reproduction of sexual
                        250 O THE COLLEGE       OF SOCIOLOGY

animals and men can be divided into two phases, each one presenting these same
aspects: excess, laceration, and loss of substance. In the first phase two beings
communicate with each other through their hidden rents. There i1s no communi-
cation more profound: two beings are lost in a convulsion that binds them to-
gether. But they only communicate when losing a part of themselves. Communi-
cation ties them together with wounds, where their unity and integrity dissipates
in fever.
    Two beings of the opposite sex lose themselves in each other, and together
form a new being, different from each of them. The precariousness of this new
being is manifest: the two parts always remain distinct; there 1s nothing more
than, in short moments of obscurity, a tendency to lose consciousness. But if it
is true that the unity of the individual reemerges with greater clarity, this unity
is no less precarious as well. Between these two cases there is, no doubt, only
a difference of degree.
    Love expresses a need for sacrifice: each unity must lose itself in some other,
which exceeds it. But the happy movements of the flesh have a double orienta-
tion. Because going through flesh—going through the point where the unity of
a person is torn apart—is necessary if, in losing oneself, one wants to rediscover
oneself in the unity of love, it does not follow that the moment of tearing apart
is itself devoid of meaning    for torn-apart existence.   It is difficult to know,   in
a coupling of beings, how much is passion for another being, how much is erotic
frenzy, up to what point the being looks for life and power, and up to what point
it is led to tear itself apart and lose itself, at the same time tearing apart and
losing another (and of course the more a woman is beautiful the more her tearing
apart, her loss, or simply her sudden nudity are desirable). Beyond the will to
leave one’s narrow being for one that is more vast, there is—very often mixed
with this first will to loss—a will to loss that now only finds limits to its im-
moderate movements in fear, and even more that takes advantage of the fear it
provokes in order to become all the more inflamed and delirious.
    To this description of the first forms of being revealed by love, it is necessary
to add the union that results from marriage. Many possibilities exist, going for
the movement of passion to the sort of oppressive conjugal life where the heart
is no longer at stake. At the most extreme point, self-interest and law found the
joyless unity of beings for whom physical love is only a concession to nature.
If one now thinks of the various social groups that correspond to the various
forms of sexual union, all in opposition to each other, juridical and administra-
tive society have close ties with the conjugal union founded on self-interest, the
community formed through heartfelt ties recalls the passionate unity of lovers,
and forms are not lacking that have in common with erotic perversions the fact
that the loss of self in a vaster being is the occasion for a loss of self in a formless
universe and in death.
    There is, I know, a paradoxical element here; these parallels will necessarily
                       THE COLLEGE OF SOCIOLOGY        0O   251

appear to be very arbitrary. However I do not introduce them with the intention
of making their meaning precise. [ propose to admit, as a law, that human beings
are only united with each other through rents or wounds; this notion has, in
itself, a certain logical force. If elements are put together to form a whole, this
can easily happen when each one loses, through a rip in its integrity, a part of
its own being, which goes to benefit the communal being. Initiations, sacrifices,
and festivals represent so many moments of loss and communication between
individuals. Circumcisions and orgies show adequately that there is more than
one link between   sexual laceration and ritual laceration; the erotic world    itself
has been careful to designate the act in which it is fulfilled as a ‘“little death””
[petite mort]. But one of the two domains exceeds the other; the domain of social
laceration that coincides with sexual laceration has a changed and richer mean-
ing, and the multiplicity of its forms extends from war to the bloody cross of
Christ; the execution of a king and the sexual act only have in common       the fact
that they unify through the loss of substance. And it is in the creation or the
maintenance of a new unity of being that they resemble each other; it would be
vain to claim that the one, like the other, is the effect of an obscure instinct of
generation whose action accounts for all human forms.
    Thus I can say that the “sacred” is communication between beings, and
thereby the formation of new beings. The notion elaborated by sociologists,
according to which it is possible to describe the play of the sacred by comparing
it to electrical currents and charges, permits me to introduce an image that will
explain my position. The wounds or rents of which I have spoken take place,
opening the way for any number of eruptions of accumulated force. But this
eruption of force out of oneself, produced for the benefit of social power, in
religious sacrifice as well as in war, is not in any way produced like the easily
understood expenditures necessary to acquire a necessary or desirable object.
Although sacrifices and festivals are generally useful, they possess in themselves
a value of attraction independent of the conscious or unconscious results they
favor. Men, assembling for a sacrifice and for a festival, satisfy their need to
expend a vital excess. The sacrificial laceration that opens the festival is a liber-
ating laceration. The individual who participates in loss is obscurely aware that
this loss engenders the community that supports him. But a desirable woman is
necessary to he who makes love, and it is not always easy to know if he makes
love in order to be united with her, or if he uses her because of his need to make
love. In the same way, it is difficult to know to what extent the community 1s
but the favorable occasion for a festival and a sacrifice, or to what extent the
festival and the sacrifice bear witness to the love individuals give to the com-
munity.
     In fact, it appears that this question, which might seem simply quaint,
appears as the final question of man, and further on as the final question of
being. Being is indeed constantly enticed in two directions, one leading to the
                        252 [J THE COLLEGE OF SOCIOLOGY

formation of durable organizations and conquering forces, the other leading,
through the intermediary of expenditures of force and of increasing excess, to
destruction and death. We confront these options even in life’s most common-
place circumstances: the debate over the opportuneness of a useful or
seductive expenditure has behind it the weighing of acquisition against loss. But
in everyday practice the extreme points have disappeared so thoroughly that
everything is almost unrecognizable. The movement only regains its full
meaning when it is a question of sexual commerce. The union of lovers finds
itself facing this infinite interrogation: supposing that the unified being that they
form counts more for them than love, lovers find themselves condemned to a
slow stabilization in their relations. The empty horror of regular conjugality
already encloses them. But if the need to love and to lose oneself is stronger in
them than the concern for finding oneself, then there is no other outcome than
laceration, the perversions of tumultuous passion, drama, and if it is a question
of a total need, death. I must add that eroticism constitutes a kind of flight before
the rigor of this dilemma. But I only speak of it now in order to pass on to a
more general consideration.
    When a man and a woman are united by love, they together form an associa-
tion, a being entirely closed in on itself, but when the first equilibrium is com-
promised, a naked erotic search may be added to or substituted for the search
of the lovers, who at first had as their object only themselves. The need to lose
oneself, in them, goes beyond the need to find oneself. At this moment the
presence of a third is no longer, as it was at the start of their love, the final
obstacle. Beyond the common being that they meet in their embrace, they search
for a measureless annihilation in a violent expenditure whereby the possession
of a new object, of a new woman or a new man, is only a pretext for an even
more annihilating expenditure. In the same way, men more religious than others
cease to have a narrow concern for the community for which sacrifices are
performed. They no longer live for the community; they only live for sacrifice.
Thus little by little they are possessed by the desire to extend, through contagion,
their sacrificial frenzy. Just as eroticism slides without difficulty toward the
orgy, sacrifice, becoming an end in itself, lays claim to universal value, beyond
the narrowness of the community.
    In the case of social life, however, the first movements can only be extended
to the extent that the aspiration to sacrifice finds a god who supports it. As were
closed forms, in other words the simplest forms, the community was for certain
people the occasion for sacrifice; it is necessary to find again the equivalent of
the community in the form of a universal god, in order to extend endlessly the
sacrificial orgy. Dionysus and the Crucified thus lead a tragic procession of
bacchantes and martyrs. But the rent opened by the irruption of the universal
god out of the old local community eventually recloses. The god of the Chris-
tians is in turn reduced to the status of guarantor of the social order. But he
                       THE COLLEGE OF SOCIOLOGY         U 253

becomes, again, the wall against which the rage of love for love throws itself.
And it is without a doubt at this point that the final question of being takes shape.
The eternal extension of God serves, first of all, the objective of enabling each
person who loses himself to refind himself in him. But what 1s then missing is
the satisfaction of those who aspire only to be lost, without remission. When
Theresa of Avila screamed that she was dying of not dying, her passion, moving
beyond any possible barrier, broke an opening that leads into a universe where
perhaps there is no composition either of form or of being, where it seems that
death rolls from world to world. For the organized composition of beings is
apparently deprived of the slightest meaning when it is a matter of the totality
of all things; this totality cannot be the analog of composite beings, animated
by the same movement that we know.

   At this point, then, I suppose that my plan seems strange. But I have only
wanted to describe, to the fullest extent, the problem that imposes its dangers
from the moment man agrees to question the sociological sphinx. It seems to me
that meeting this sphinx has singularly increased the precision and the brutality
of metaphysical interrogation. Essentially, what I wanted to say is that a College
of Sociology as we have conceived it necessarily opens this bottomless interro-
gation. It is possible that I sometimes give the impression of lingering over
morose preconceptions in my consideration of the impossible. I could answer
with a single sentence. I will not do so today. Today I will be satisfied with in-
troducing a few practical statements concerning the means proper to the College
of Sociology.

   Text of Caillois’s letter.

   Is it possible to find a reason to fight and die different from those that have
to do with fatherland and class, a reason to fight that would not be founded on
material interests? Can the concern for human grandeur, taken on by a small
number, constitute by itself a sufficient reason to exist? But what exactly does
one [mean] when one speaks of grandeur?
   Since it has been a question of [classes], could there be classes without a
Church, without the sacred, without sacrifice?
   Could there be a society without spiritual power, radically distinct from
temporal power?
A Commentary on the Texts
A Commentary on the Texts




None of Bataille’s writings from the prewar period were included in a larger
volume in his lifetime (with three exceptions: Histoire de | oeil, privately pub-
lished [134 copies were printed] in a collection of pornographic novels in 1928;
the novel Le Bleu du ciel [1935], first published in 1957; and “Le Bleu du ciel”
[a short article, not the novel], which first appeared in Minotaure in 1936
and which reappeared as part of L'Expérience intérieure [1943]). Bataille’s
prewar writings were only collected in book form when the first two volumes of
the Oeuvres   Complètes,   edited by Denis Hollier, were published   in 1970.
    In choosing from the nearly 1,000 pages of material in volumes I and II, I
have attempted to include Bataille’s most significant writings. In virtually all
cases, however, I think the problems covered in pieces not included in this col-
lection are also treated in those presented here.
    The latter part of volume II of the Oeuvres Complètes (pp. 291-374) contains
eight lectures given by Bataille before the Collège de Sociologie, which date
from 1937-39. These have since been reedited (by Denis Hollier) in a volume
entitled Le Collège de sociologie (Paris: Gallimard, Collection ‘‘Idées,’’ 1979);
also in this volume are the lectures given by all the other participants in the
Collège (Leiris, Caillois, Klossowski, Lewitzky, etc.). À translation of this
collection 1s to be published in 1985 by the University of Minnesota Press.
    The writings are presented in roughly chronological order—roughly, because
many of the posthumous writings cannot be precisely dated. The publication of
some texts took place several years after composition; in these cases, I have held
to the date of composition for determining the order. All texts are presented in
their entirety. Ellipsis dots are those of Bataille.

                                        257
                       258 [1 A COMMENTARY      ON THE TEXTS

                                    I (1927-1930)
[Dream]. First published in the Oeuvres Complétes (henceforth OC) 1I, 9-10.
The manuscript is marked ‘“Recorded in 1927, around June.’’ This dream was
recorded as part of Bataille’s psychoanalysis, done under Dr. Adrien Borel. Dr.
Borel reappears in ‘‘Sacrificial Mutilation and the Severed Ear of Vincent Van
Gogh’’ as one of the authors of the case report on the automutilator, Gaston F.

The Solar Anus. Written in 1927; first published in 1931 by Editions de la
Galérie Simon, Paris, and illustrated with drypoint etchings by André Masson.
Reprinted   in OC   I, 81-86.

The Language of Flowers. First published in Documents 3 (June 1929):160-68.
Reprinted in OC 1, 173-78. After Breton attacked the veracity of the story of
Sade and the rose petals (see the ‘‘Introduction,’’ above), Bataille had his friend,
the Sade expert Maurice Heine, research it. Unfortunately, the story turned out
to be apocryphal (see OC II, 422).

Materialism. Documents 3 (June 1929):170. Reprinted in OC I, 179-80. This
was a contribution to a ‘‘Critical Dictionary,’’ a regular feature of Documents
that presented definitions written by the various contributors—Desnos,          Leiris,
Limbour, as well as Bataille.

Eye. Documents 4 (September         1929):216. Reprinted in OC I, 187-89.

The Big Toe. Documents          6 (November   1929):297-302.      Reprinted   in OC    I,
200-204.

The ‘‘Lugubrious Game,’’ Documents 7 (December 1929):297-302. Reprinted
in OC I, 211-16. This article is the most direct response to Breton that Bataille
published in Documents. Bataille could only include a sketch of Dali’s Lugu-
brious Game because Dali, at this time still under the influence of Breton, re-
fused permission to reproduce a photograph of the painting (several of Dali’s
paintings had earlier been reproduced in Documents 4, including Blood Is
Sweeter than Honey).

Formless. Documents 7 (December          1929):382.   Reprinted    in OC I, 217.      An
entry in the ‘‘Critical Dictionary.”’

The ‘‘Old Mole’’ and the Prefix Sur in the Words Surhomme [Superman] and
Surrealist. First published in Tel Quel 34 (Summer 1968), and reprinted in OC
I1, 93-109. Although the date of this essay is uncertain, it clearly dates from
the height of the Bataille/Breton controversy and therefore probably from
                      A COMMENTARY       ON THE TEXTS    U 259

 1929-30. It was accepted for publication by the short-lived avant-garde review
Bifur (which published, in this period, articles by Heidegger and Sartre, among
others), the last issue of which appeared in June, 1931. Bifur ceased publication,
however, before “The ”Old Mole” could see the light of day. This translation
is by Donald M. Leslie, Jr.

Base   Materialism   and   Gnosticism.   Documents,   second     year,   1   (1930):1-8.
Reprinted in OC I, 220-26. Many of the illustrations accompanying this article
are of stones from the collection of the Cabinet des Médailles of the Bibliothèque
Nationale in Paris; Bataille worked in the Cabinet des Médailles at the time this
article was written.

The Deviations of Nature. Documents, second year, 2 (1930):79-83. Reprinted
in OC I, 228-30. Eisenstein was attempting to develop a kind of dialectical
materialist ideational montage in films such as October. Eisenstein’s theories of
dialectical shock in fact bear a certain resemblance to Bataille’s early theory of
heterogeneity, (and the attempt to situate it in a materialist dialectic), though
they are less scabrous (see in this context especially Bataille’s ‘‘Psychological
Structure of Fascism’’). (Important essays by Eisenstein are collected in The
Film Sense, trans. and ed. Jay Leda [New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,
1947].) Materialist theories of montage and shock were very much the order of
the day, as in Walter Benjamin’s ‘‘constellation’’ theory of materialism (see note
18 of our Introduction,    above).

Rotten Sun. Documents, second year, 3 (1930):173-74. Reprinted                 in OC   I,
231-32. This article was part of an ‘‘Hommage à Picasso.’’

Mouth. Documents, second year, 5 (1930):299.          Reprinted in OC I, 237-38.
Another entry in the ‘‘Critical Dictionary.”’

Sacrificial Mutilation and the Severed Ear of Vincent Van Gogh. Documents,
second year, 8 (1930):10-20. Reprinted in OC I, 258-70.

The Jesuve. First published in OC II, 13-20. This piece was evidently written
in 1930, for a crossed-out note in the manuscript indicates that the ‘“pineal eye’”
obsession first came to Bataille ‘‘three years ago,”” in 1927. The word
‘‘Jesuve,’’ which also appears in ‘‘The Solar Anus’’ and ‘‘The Pineal Eye,’’ is
apparently a word devised by Bataille himself; its meaning is open to conjecture.
In it, we can perceive a number of words: “‘je’’ (*‘I’’), ‘“Jésus’’ (which in
French is also a kind of sausage), ‘“‘sève’’ (‘“sap’’), etc.

The Pineal Eye. First published in L’Ephémère 3 (1967); reprinted in OC II,
21-35. Although the date is uncertain, it is clearly from roughly the same period
                      260 [J A COMMENTARY         ON   THE   TEXTS


as ‘‘The Jesuve.”” Among other fragmentary notes connected with ‘“The Pineal
Eye’’ found among Bataille’s papers, there is this one (II, 418):

  All the plants of the earth are raised to the sky, and they continuously
  throw myriads of brilliant multicolored jets of spittle at the sun, in the
  form of flowers, and there is only an obscene Van Gogh, surrounded
  by madmen, to throw at this same sun the phallic spit of his eyes. The
  other human creatures miserably drag themselves around like giant
  impotent and correct phalluses, their eyes riveted on soporific
  surroundings.
     It is necessary to break oneself in pieces and feel in one’s body the
  madness    of a contortionist;    at the same   time one must become    a fetish-
  ist to the point of slavering, a fetishist of the eye, of the buttocks and
  of the feet, all at once, in order to find again in oneself what miser-
  ably miscarried at the beginning of the constitution of the human body.


This piece is followed in OC II by three short variants.

The Use Value of D. A. F. de Sade (An Open Letter to My Current Comrades).
First published in OC II, 54-69. This position paper is from 1929 or 1930.
While it clearly is connected with Bataille’s polemic against André Breton (and
Breton’s view of Sade), it also looks forward to a number of positions that
Bataille developed in the Critique sociale essays. It is followed in OC II by a
short variant.


                                     II (1932-1935)
The Critique of the Foundations of the Hegelian Dialectic. First published in La
Critique sociale 5 (March 1932):209-14. Reprinted in Deucalion 5 (1955) and
in OC 1, 277-90. This article was written jointly with Raymond Queneau
(1903-76); Queneau’s contribution (including note 13) is in brackets. Queneau,
after breaking with Bataille in the late 1930s (he disapproved of the Acéphale
project and its rituals) went on to become well known as an experimental novel-
ist (Exercises de style, 19477, Zazie dans le métro, 1959) and as an editor (he
assembled the various notes and articles to make Alexandre Kojeve’s Introduc-
tion à la lecture de Hegel [1947]).

The Notion of Expenditure.         La Critique sociale 7 (January    1933):7-15.      Re-
printed in OC I, 302-20. This translation was first published in Raritan Review,
Winter   1984.

Sacrifices. The manuscript is dated ‘“Summer 1933”; first published by Editions
G. L. M. in October 1936 (G. L. M. was also the publisher of the review
                           A COMMENTARY    ON THE TEXTS      U 261

Acéphale) as the text accompanying an album of etchings by André Masson.
Reprinted in OC I, 89-96.

The Psychological Structure of Fascism. La Critique sociale 10 (November
1933):159-65, and 11 (March 1934):205-11. Reprinted in OC I, 339-71. This
translation, by Carl R. Lovitt, was first published in New           German   Critique   16
(Winter   1979).

Popular Front in the Street. First published in the Cahiers de Contre-Attaque 1
(May 1936)—the only issue of the Cahiers to be published. Reprinted in OC I,
402-12. This speech was given by Bataille at a Contre-Attaque meeting of
November    24,    1935.
    It must be recalled when reading Bataille’s writings from 1935 to 1940 that
there is an assumption that democracy in the West is doomed; the choice is
between some form of communism and fascism. In this light, Bataille’s espousal
of a revolution through sexuality and myth takes on added force: faced with a
choice between the clear tyranny of fascism and the tendency of bureaucratic
Communists to dessicate life—and with democracy not a viable alternative—the
only option was to affirm Revolution, while attempting to situate it in relation
to values that all ‘‘official’’ parties refused to consider seriously. Bataille then
had two alternatives: either to work somehow in conjunction with the Commu-
nists, as a Marxist,       a course of action he advocates    in ‘‘Popular Front in the
Street,’’ or to refuse the mode of struggle of the Stalinist Communist party en-
tirely (thereby refusing to be a Communist), while not refusing the inevitability
of a Marxist ‘‘end of history’’—the position Bataille takes in the Acéphale
period. In either case, his relations with Communist party orthodoxy were
bound to be strained.
    A bit of history may be in order here: the Croix de Feu (‘“Cross of Fire’’)
was a paramilitary organization headed by Colonel François de la Rocque; like
the early Nazis, it was half party, half right-wing war veterans’ organization.
Disbanded in the later 1930s, it regrouped under another name. In 1934 its
strength was about 20,000 or 30,000 men.
    The ‘‘events of February’’ 1934 started with the revelation of the Stavisky
affair. The disclosure of high-level corruption gave right-wing paramilitary
organizations the opportunity they had been waiting for; their rioting in Paris
on February 6-7, while not resulting in the desired coup d’état, nevertheless
caused the Radical party’s government to fall. The Republic held firm, if not
the government; the ‘‘forces of order’’ were responsible for the death of at least
twelve right-wing agitators, members of a group that unsuccessfully attempted
to reach the Palais-Bourbon.
    The response on the left was immediate: first the non-Communist groups
organized, marching on February 7 and calling for a peaceful general strike
                      262 ) A COMMENTARY        ON THE TEXTS

against fascism—but not against the government—for February 12. The Com-
munists first called for immediate action against the government for February
9; this resulted in fighting with the police in the eastern (working class) sections
of Paris, with a number of Communists killed. At that point the Communists
agreed to join forces with the non-Communist left and participate in the strike
on February 12.
    This strike, a success, opened the way for an antifascist alliance of the Com-
munist and non-Communist left, the Popular Front, which finally came to power
in June 1936.
    Of course this alliance was not without tension—Bataille’s speech indicates
the frustration of many intellectuals of the left both with the Communists’ reluc-
tance to maintain an alliance with other parties of the left and with the Commu-
nist tendency to support implicitly the French Army (Pierre Laval, head of the
government, visited Moscow in May 1935, where Stalin indicated his approval
of the anti-German—and thus necessarily the militaristic, *‘patriotic’’—orienta-
tion of Laval’s government).


                                  III (1936-1939)

The Labyrinth. First published in Recherches philosophiques 5 (1935-36):
364-72. Reprinted in OC I, 433-41. A different version of this article appeared
in L'Expérience intérieure under the title ‘‘Le Labyrinthe (ou la composition des
étres).”’

The Sacred Conspiracy. First published in Acéphale 1 (June 1936):2-4. Re-
printed in OC I, 442-46. The first three issues of Acéphale were illustrated by
André Masson.
    One way of looking at the changeover from Contre-Attaque to Acéphale
might be this. As Bataille makes clear in section 18 of ‘‘The Use Value of D.
A. F. de Sade’’ (written around 1930), there are two distinct phases: the ‘‘revo-
lutionary phase’’ and the ‘‘postrevolutionary phase.’’ In the first phase, orgiastic
and destructive drives are coordinated with the (political and social) revolution.
In the second phase, with the revolution carried out, there is a separation
between political and social organizations on the one hand, and an ‘‘antireligious
and asocial organization’’ (an anticipation of Acéphale?) on the other. And in
fact, strangely enough given the murky political situation of the later 1930s,
Bataille in 1937 considers the end of history to be at hand, the totalizing revolu-
tion just around the corner, after the collapse of democracy (see the ‘‘Letter to
X [Kojeve}]'’ of 1937 [V, 369-71]). Thus, with the coming to power of the
Popular Front, Bataille gives up his open advocacy of Communist revolution.
But then a much larger problem emerges: to what extent does the separation of
                       A COMMENTARY      ON THE TEXTS     [J 263

the political and economic organization from the antireligious and asocial one
lead to a conflict between the two? This problem, never posed explicitly in
Bataille’s theoretical writings, nevertheless emerges in his fiction—especially in
the novels Le Bleu du ciel (1935) and L'Abbé C. (1950).

Nietzsche and the Fascists. Acéphale 2 (January       1937):3-13. Reprinted in OC
I, 447-65.

Propositions. Acéphale 2 (January       1937):17-21. Reprinted in OC 1, 467-73.

Nietzschean Chronicle. Acéphale 3-4 (July 1937):15-23. Reprinted in OC I,
477-90. It should be recalled that Bataille’s attempt at founding a Nietzschean
‘““faith,’’ or even ‘‘church,’’ was a short-lived one; by September 1939 (the out-
break of the war) he had given it up, dismissing it as a ‘“‘fad.’’ For more on the
permutations of Nietzsche in Bataille, see my article ‘‘From Acéphale to the
Will to Chance: Nietzsche in the Text of Bataille,’’ in Glyph 6 (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1979).

The Obelisk. First published in Mesures, fourth year, 2 (April 15, 1938):35-50.
Reprinted in OC I, 501-13. Bataille’s fascination with the execution of the king
(specifically, Louis XVI, on January 21, 1793) took many forms: a Contre-
Attaque meeting of January 21, 1936 commemorated the king’s death; the topic
of the talk was the question of the ‘200 Families’’ who ruled France (a common
theme in the days of the Popular Front) and who, by implication at least, faced
the same fate as the king (I, 394) (the flyer announcing the meeting bears a
sketch of a calf’s head on a plate). One of the Acéphale rituals—which was never
carried out—was to soak a human skull in brine until it became soft and mal-
leable, then place it at the base of the obelisk in the Place de la Concorde on
January 21 (1938?); the Press was then to be notified of the very mysterious
reappearance of the king’s skull.

The Sorcerer’s Apprentice. First published in the Nouvelle Revue Francaise 298
(July   1938):5-54.   Reprinted in OC   I, 523-37.   This was Bataille’s only article
to appear in the prewar NRF, which at the time was the hegemonic intellectual
review par excellence. Bataille’s article appeared along with one by Michel
Leiris (‘‘Le Sacré dans la vie quotidienne’’) and one by Roger Caillois (‘‘Le
Vent d’hiver’’); the appearance of these articles signaled to the public the activ-
ities of the Collège de Sociologie. (The Caillois and Leiris articles will appear
in the forthcoming translation of Hollier’s Le Collège de sociologie anthology.)

The Practice of Joy before Death. Acéphale S (June 1939):1-8. Reprinted in OC
I, 552-58. Bataille wrote all the pieces in this last issue of Acéphale; as is clear
                      264 O A COMMENTARY        ON THE TEXTS

in the ‘‘meditation’’ presented here, by this time Bataille recognized the likeli-
hood of the violent death he had contemplated for so long—but now death starts
to appear in the guise of the imminent world war. The fragmentary writing on
an individual ‘‘practice of meditation’’ looks forward to the method and subject
matter of Bataille’s Somme Athéologique (L’Expérience intérieure, Le
Coupable, Sur Nietzsche).

The Sacred, First published in Cahiers d'art, fourteenth yeaar,          1-4 (1939):
47-50. Reprinted in OC I, 559-63.

The College of Sociology. Presented on July 4, 1939, before the College; first
published in OC II, 364-74. This was the last meeting of the College. Leiris’s
letter, dated July 3 (II, 454-55) raises three objections to the Collège as Bataille
conceived it: 1) the Collège, having set itself the task of studying ‘‘social struc-
tures,’’ has not properly defined the term, has compared societies that are pro-
foundly different, and thus has violated the rules of Durkheimian methodology;
2) the ‘“moral community’’ desired by Bataille threatens to turn itself into an
Order or a Church, if not simply literary clique (this in fact is the criticism
Bataille himself later directed against the Acéphale group), and a doctrine for
this community has not even been elaborated (a doctrine is never established by
a community—instead, communities are founded to follow an already-consti-
tuted doctrine); 3) by stressing ‘‘sacred’’ sociology, Bataille ignores all the other
aspects of society, as sketched out by Marcel Mauss in his notion of the ‘‘total
phenomenon.’’

                                                                                A.S.
Index
Index




Abel, Niels Henrik, 110                              xxiii; and André Breton, x-xi; on birth
Acéphale: as group, xix-xxiii; as review,            and childhood, ix; and the Collège de
    xix-xxiii, 262-63; as ritual, 263. See also      Sociologie, xix-xxiii; and Contre-Attaque,
    Society, acephalic                                xviii; and La Critique sociale, xiv-xvii,
Action, 226-27                                       and Documents, xi-xiii; on earliest
Aeschylus, 189                                       writings, x; and Marxism, xv-xix, Xxv
Agiology, 102 n2                                      n22; and Pineal Eye myth, xiii-xv; and
Allegory, xiii-xv                                     psychoanalytic cure, xii; and Salvador
Ambrosino, Georges, xix                               Dali, xii
America, United States of, 126, 157               Battleship Potemkin, The (Eisenstein), 56
Anaxarchus of Abdera,     71                      Bäumler, Alfred, 190-91
Andalusian Dog, An (Bunuel and Dali), 17          Benda, Julien, 194-95 n4
Andler, Charles,   195 n7, 201 n2                 Benjamin, Walter, xxi, xxv n18, 259
Annales médico-psychologiques, 61                 Bergmann, Ernst, 189-90
Anthropology, xiii, xxi-xxii, 79-82               Bes, 50
Anti-Dühring (Engels), 107-8                      Bifur, xv, 259
Anubis, 50                                        Birth of Tragedy, The (Nietzsche), quoted,
Appearance,   11-12                                   206
Appropriation, 94-96                              Bleu du ciel, Le (Blue of Noon-Bataille),
Aragon, Louis, ix                                     novel, x, 257, 263
Archontes, xx, 48-49                              ‘“Bleu du ciel, Le’’ (Bataille), article, 257
Areteus, 67                                       Blum, Léon, xviii
Avec Doriot (Drieu la Rochelle), xx               Boatstuau, Pierre, 53-56
                                                  Boehme, Jakob, 109
Bachofen, Johann Jakob,        189                Bonapartism, 158
Bardesanus, 46                                    Borel, Dr. Adrien, x, 71 nl, 258
Basilides, 46                                     Borgia, Cesare, 186
Bataille, Georges: and Acéphale group, xix-       Bourdeau, Jean, 195
                                           268 [J INDEX

Breton, André, ix-xii, xvili, 39-43, 260           Decomposition, 174-77
Buddhism, 102, 205                                 De la Faille, J. B. See La Faille, J.B. de
Bunuel, Luis, 19 nl                                De Lagarde, Paul, 187-88
                                                   De la Rocque, Francois, xx, 167, 261
Caillois, Roger, xviii, xx-xxii, 246-48,   253,    De Launay, Governor Bernard Marquis, 28
    257, 263                                       Demeter, 189
Catastrophe, 134, 200                              Democracy, 198, 261
Cauchy, Augustin Louis, 110                        Dermenghem, Emile, 245
Cervantes, Miguel de. See De Cervantes,            De Sade, Donatien Alphonse Frangois, Com-
    Miguel                                             te, xi, 14, 28, 92-94, 178, 210-11, 260
Challaye, Felicien, 195 n7                         Desnos, Robert, xi, 258
Chamberlain, Houston Stewart, 187                  Deviations of Nature, The (Regnault), 53-56
Chance, 229-31                                     Difference: nonexplainable, 141; nonlogical,
Christ, xvii                                           xvii, 129
Christianity, 46-47, 126-28, 133-34, 189,          Dionysos, xx, 189, 205-6, 210, 252
    205, 242                                       Documents, xi-xiv, 258-59
Cimmino, 186                                       Don Giovanni (Mozart), 181
Class struggle, 108, 123-26                        Doriot,    Jacques,    xx
Clausewitz, Carl von, 215                          Drieu la Rochelle, Pierre, xx, 195 n7
Collège de Sociologie: conflicts in, 246; crisis   Durkheim, Emile, xviii, xxi, 142, 160 n4,
    of, 248; as group, xx-xxiii, 246-53; pur-          247, 264
    poses of, 247
Collège de Sociologie, Le (Hollier), xxv nn17      Eastman,     Max,     105
    and 22, 257, 263                               Ecarts de la nature, Les. See Deviations of
College of Sociology. See Collège de                   Nature, The
    Sociologie                                     Ecce Homo (Nietzsche), quoted, 219-20
Communist Manifesto, The (Marx), 35                Eckhart, Meister, 109
Communist party, French, 163-68, 261-62            Eisenstein, Sergei, 56, 259
Composition, 173-77                                Elizabeth, Queen of Spain, 21
Concentration, 149                                 Engels, Friedrich: and Christianity, 211 n2;
Constant, Benjamin, 202                                and dialectic of nature, 107-9; and
Contemplation, 235-37                                  mathematics, 110-12
Contre-Attaque: as group, xviii; journal of,       Eroticism, 227-30, 250-53
    261                                            Erotisme, L'(Death and Sensuality—Bataille),
Crawford, Joan, xi                                     XXil
Critique sociale, La, xvi-xix, 260-61              Eye of the Police, 19
Croix de Feu, La, 164, 167, 261                    Excretion, 94-96
Cronus, 218                                        Expenditure, 118-20
Cross: embrace of, 133-34; on obelisks,
    218-19                                         F., Gaston, 61-62, 66, 258
Crucified, The, xx, 252                            Fascism: risk of, in Bataille, xvi-xix; as
Cybele, priests of, 67                                 sovereignty, 145-49; and the State,
                                                       154-56; and thugs, 166
Dada, 211                                          Fascism, Italian, 155-56, 168
Dali, Salvador, xii, 19 n1, 27-29, 258             Fetishism: foot, 22-23; general, 260
Darwin, Charles, xii, 187                          Fichte, J. G., 109
D'Aulnoy, Mme, 21                                  Fiction, 225-26
Dausse, Dr., x                                     Fletcher, Angus, xiii, xxiv n10
De Cervantes, Miguel, 212 n8                       Flowers: and ideal beauty, 12; and love,
                                             INDEX   U 269

    10-11; and sacrilege, 13; and symbolic in-        Histoire de l’oeil (Story of the Eye—Bataille),
    terpretation, 13-14                                    ix, 257
Forms, subversive, 12-14, 24-27, 51-52, 58,           Histoires prodigieuses (Boaistuau), 53-56
     157                                              Hitler, Adolf, xx, 156, 182-83
Forster, Bernard, 182-83                              Hollier, Denis, xxiii n2, xxiv n8, xxv nn17
Forster-Nietzsche, Elisabeth, 182-83, 194 n2               and 22, 257, 263
Freud, Sigmund, 15, 23, 72 n16, 160 nn7, 8,           Homogeneity: 68, 95; and heterogeneity, 151,
    and 11                                                 153, 156-59; and production, 140; and
Fritsch, Theodor, 183                                      State, 137-39
                                                      Hubert, Henri, 69-70, 72 n23
Galton, Sir Francis, 55                               Hugo, Victor, 17, 19 n2
Gauguin, Paul, 63-66                                  Humanité, L’, 163
Gauss, K. F., 110
Gay Science, The (Nietzsche), quoted,       186,      lao, 49
     193, 213-14                                      Icarus, 34, 58
Gentile, Giovanni, 155                                Ideler, 71 n6
Geoffroy-Saint-Hilaire, 55                            Hiad, The (Homer),      189
Girard, René, xviii                                   Insufficiency, 171-73
Gnosticism: as dualism, 45-46; and forms,             Ipse, 173-78
   51-52; as illegitimate principle, 47               Islam,   154-55
God: as beyond, 236-37; death of, 38, 213,
    218, 242, 245; as eternal integration, 198;       Jaspers, Karl, 71 n2, 196 n31
   as ‘‘knowledge,’’ xiii; as morality,               Jaurès, Jean, 195 n7
   133-34; as sadistic skeleton, 134; as sign         Jehovah, 47
   of universal homogeneity, 96; as                   Jérôme, Pierre, 165
   sovereignty, 153                                   Jesuve, 8, 73-78, 79, 84, 86, 259
Grandville, J.J., 17-19                               Justine (Sade), 92; quoted, 95
Granero,   x
Guillotine, 220-21                                    Kant, Immanuel, 35
Guinard, 55                                           Keller, Rose, 28, 30 n3
                                                      Kierkegaard, Seren, xxi, 178
Hartmann, Nicolai, 105, 108, 109, 112, 114            Klages, Ludwig, 189
    n4                                                Klossowski, Pierre, xix, xx, 257
Hauer, Jacob Wilhelm, 189-90                          Kojève, Alexandre, xv, xvi, xx, xxiii, 260,
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, xii, xiii, 34,            262, 263
    52, 105-14, 218-19
Hegelianism, 43, 45-46, 52, 105-14, 219               La Faille, J. B. de, 62-64
Heidegger, Martin, xxi, xxv n19, 200, 259             Lagarde, Paul de. See De Lagarde, Paul
Heine, Maurice, 28, 30 n3, 258                        Laval, Pierre, 262
Heraclitus, 109, 20§, 218, 220, 239                   Leiris, Michel, x, xi, xx, xxi, xxii, xxiv,
Hermes (of Praxiteles), 55                                 246-48, 257, 258, 264
Heterogeneity: and fascism (sovereignty),             Lenin, N., 114 n7
    145-49; and force, 143; and foreign body,         Lévinas, Emmanuel, 192-93
   94; and homogeneity, 70, 151, 156-59;              Lévi-Strauss, Claude, xxi
   imperative,   xvii; and military,   149-51;        Lewitzky, Anatole, xx, 257
   and religion, 151-53; and sacred, 142,             Life: dissociated, 227; full, 228
    144; and State, 155-56; and unassimilable         Limbour, Georges, xi, 258
    elements, 140-41; and violence, 142               Logic (Hegel), 42, 105-6
Heterology, 96-102                                    Lorthiois, M., 71 n6
                                           270 [J INDEX


Loyola, Saint Ignatius of, 211                      Notre Dame de Reims (Bataille), ix
Ludendorff, General Erich, 190                      Numantia (Cervantes), 207-10
Lugubrious Game, The (Dali), xii, 24-29, 29
    nl                                              Obelisk, 215, 216, 220-21
Lukacs, Georg, 185                                  Oehler, Richard, 183, 195 n5
Luquet, 72 n20                                      On War (Clausewitz), 215
                                                    Owl of Minerva, 241
Mahomet, 154
Malatesta, 186                                      Paulhan, Jean, 248
Mana, 95, 141-42                                    Pausanias, 68-69
Manicheans, 48                                      Part maudite, La (Bataille), xxii
Marcion, 46                                         Péguy,   Charles,   187
Marriage, 250, 252                                  Phallus of Delos, 244
Marx, Karl, 32, 33, 35, 105-7, 113-14               Phenomenology of Spirit, The (Hegel), 106
Marxism, 32-43, 105-7, 113-14, 188                  Philosophy of History, The (Hegel), 106
Masson, André, xix, 181, 212 n8, 258, 261           Philosophy of Nature, The (Hegel), 106-7
Maurras, Charles, 189                               Philosophy of Right, The (Hegel), 106
Mauss, Marcel, xvi, xxi, 69-70, 72 n23, 121,        Picasso, Pablo, 24, 27, 58
    122                                             Pineal Eye (myth), xii-xv, 74-78
Mein Kampf (Hitler), 183                            Place de la Concorde, La, 215-16, 221
Mirbeau, Octave, 61                                 Plato, 109
Mithraic bull, 34, 57                               Plekhanov, Georgii, 111-12
Monnerot, Jules, xix                                Podach, Erich, 194 n2
Mussolini, Benito, xx, 155, 195 n13; and            Poetry, 29, 39-40, 93, 97, 120
    Bäumler, 191; as ‘‘Il Duce’’, 156; as a         Popular Front, xviii, 161-68, 261-62; of
    Nietzschean, 186-87; and Rosenberg, 188              combat, 165-66; as defense organization,
Mysticism, 236-37                                        164, 168
Myth, xix-xxi, 79-82, 231-33                        Potlatch, xvi, xvii, xviii, 121-23, 125-26
Myth of the Twentieth Century, The                  Prometheus, 34, 57
   (Rosenberg),   188-89,   195 nn16 and    18      Psychoanalysis, xii, 11, 113
                                                    Public Square, 214
Napoleon, 34                                        Puech, Henry-Charles, 46
National-Socialism (Germany), 154-56, 168,          Pyramids, 215-16, 219-20
    187-89
Nausea (Sartre), 245 nl                             Queneau,   Raymond,       xvi, 110-11,   114 n13,
Nicholas of Cusa, 109                                   260
Nicocreon of Athens, 71
Nicolas, Marius Paul, 194                           Regnault, 53-56
Nietzsche, Friedrich, xvi, xix, xx, 36-39, 61,      Reinach, Salomon, 21-22
    178, 235, 263; anti-Semitism, 182-84;           Renan, Ernest, 211 n2
    and eternal return, 220; and future,            Return, eternal, 220
    193-94; on Heraclitus’s vision, 218; and        Reventlow, Count Ernst von, 189
   Mussolini, 186-87; and mythology,                Revolution, xvi, 96, 100, 126-28,        134,   159,
   188-89; and Nazi propagandists, 182-84,               162, 200, 261
   187-91; and parable of madman, 214; and          Révolution Surrealiste, La, x
   pyramid of Surlei, 219-220                       Riazanov, David, 107, 108, 113
Nietzsche and the Future of Germany                 Richman, Michele, xxiv n14
    (Ochler), 183                                   Riese, W., 71 n2
Nietzsche, the Philosppher and Politician           Rimbaud, Arthur, 242
    (Bäumler), 190-91                               Robertson Smith, W., 72 n23
                                        INDEX   O 271


Rocque, François de la. See De La Rocque,        Taboo, 141-42
    François                                     Theresa of Avila, Saint, 253
Rosenberg, Alfred, 187-89                        Theseus, 221-22
                                                 Thus Spake Zarathustra (Nietzshe), quoted,
Sacred, 94, 101 n2, 119, 142, 144, 204, 207,         193
    241-42, 245, 251                             Tragedy, 205, 207, 218
Sacrifice, 94, 118-20, 251; and automutila-      Time, 134-36, 239; and eternal return, 220,
    tion, 67-71; in Aztec Mexico, 244; and           222; Heideggerian, 200; sensation of,
    the Jesuve, 73                                   216-17; tragic, 217-18
Sade, Marquis de. See De Sade, Donatien          Treu, Georg, 55
Sand, George, 211 n2                             Turk, 187
Sartre, Jean-Paul, xxi, 245 nl, 259
Schmidt, Carl, 189                                Uranus, 218
Science, 224-25                                   Utility, 116,   128-29, 208
Second Surrealist Manifesto, The, xi-xii,
    40-43                                        Valentinus, 46
Seillière, Baron Ernest, 196 n20                 Van Gogh, Vincent, 61-66,        70, 260
Semele, 206                                      Veblen, Thorstein, xvi
Society, 174-77                                  Vermeil, Edmond, 188
Society, acephalic, 199-200                      Vigilance Committee, 165
Sociology, xxi-xxiii, 160 nl, 223 nl, 246-53      Vigny, Alfred de, 211 n2
Somme Athéologique, La (Bataille), xxiii, 264     Villalta, 243
Sorel, Georges, 187, 195 n7                       Villamediana, Count of, 21, 23
Souvarine, Boris, xvi
Sovereignty, 145-49, 150, 153-54                 Wagner, Richard, 38
Spengler, Oswald, 211 n2                          Wahl, Jean, xix, 248
Stalin, Josef, xx, 164, 262, 195 n7               W.C. (Bataille), x
Stalinists, 198                                   Will to Power, The (Nietzsche), 38; quoted,
Stavisky affair, 261                                  186, 197
Stirner, Max, 187
Sun: and automutilation, 61-66, 71 ni; as im-     Zarathustra, 190, 191,    193
     age, x-xv, xxiv nll, 5-9, 34, 42, 57-58;     Zenon of Eleus, 71
     and Pineal Eye myth, 74, 76, 84-86           Zeus, 206, 218
Surrealism, 32-44, 241                            Zoroastrianism, 47
Georges Bataille (1897-1962), by profession a librar-
ian, was a member of the College de Sociologie and
founder of the French review Critique. Virtually an
underground figure in his lifetime, he left a vast and
heterogeneous collection of writings—pornographic
novels, poetry, essays on literary, economic, and his-
torical topics; the importance of this work has come
to be recognized only in the last twenty years. Among
his books are Story of the Eye, Blue of Noon, L’Abbé
C., Literature and Evil, Death and Sensuality (all
available in English), La Part maudite, and L’Expér-
ience intérieure.

Allan Stoekl is assistant professor of comparative
literature and French at Yale University. He 1s the
author of Politics, Writing, Mutilation: The Cases of
Bataille, Blanchot, Roussel, Leiris, and Ponge, forth-
coming from the University of Minnesota Press.

Carl R. Lovitt is assistant director of English pro-
grams at the Modern Language Association in New
York and a lecturer at New York University. He 1s
also translation editor of Sub-Stance. Donald M.
Leslie is a technical writer at Lotus Development Cor-
poration in Cambridge,   Massachusetts.
